International
export regulations
and controls
Navigating the global framework
beyond WTO rules

About the WTO
The World Trade Organization (WTO) is the international body dealing with the global rules of
trade between nations. Its main function is to ensure that trade flows as smoothly, predictably
and freely as possible, with a level playing field for all its members.
Disclaimer
The opinions expressed in these chapters are those of the authors. They do not represent
the positions or opinions of the WTO or its members and are without prejudice to
members’ rights and obligations under the WTO. Any errors are attributable to the authors.
The designations employed in this publication and the presentation of material therein do not
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the WTO concerning the legal
status of any country, area or territory or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of
its frontiers.

International
export regulations
and controls
Navigating the global framework
beyond WTO rules

Acknowledgments
This publication was coordinated by Roy Santana and Adeet Dobhal of the WTO Market
Access Division. The coordinators are grateful to the Office of the Director-General for
their cooperation, former Deputy Director-General Anabel González and Suja Rishikesh
Mavroidis, Director of the Market Access Division, for their encouragement, constant support
and guidance.
The publication was made possible with contributions prepared by: Sofie H. Flensborg (Chief
of Unit, CITES Secretariat); Malika Amélie Taoufiq-Cailliau (Legal Officer, Secretariat of the
Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions), who contributed in a personal capacity;
Frithjof Laubinger, Shunta Yamaguchi, Peter Börkey and Katarina Svatikova (Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development); the International Narcotics Control Board; Evita
Ricafort and Sara Hitchman (Secretariat of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control); Johan Rautenbach and Vanya Kumar (Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons); the Arms Trade Treaty Secretariat; the Australia Group Secretariat; and the
Wassenaar Arrangement Secretariat.
The WTO Secretariat is thankful to Gilbert M. Bankobeza (former Chief of Legal Affairs and
Compliance, Ozone Secretariat, United Nations Environment Programme) and the Security
Council Affairs Division (Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, United Nations)
for reviewing the respective contributions.
Contributions and comments were also received from staff members of the WTO Secretariat,
in particular Roberta Lascari and Simon Neumueller (Market Access Division).

Contents
Foreword 3
Introduction 4
Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements 6
WTO Secretariat
Part 1 Environmental protection 25
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 26
Wild Fauna and Flora
CITES Secretariat
Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions 36
OECD Decision of the Council on the Control of Transboundary 48
Movements of Wastes Destined for Recovery
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and 56
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer
Part 2 Drugs control 65
International Drug Control Conventions 66
(1961, 1971 and 1988 Conventions)
International Narcotics Control Board
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and Protocol 78
to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products
Secretariat of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control

2 Contents
Part 3 Weapons and disarmament 87
United Nations Security Council resolutions and export controls 88
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, 94
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and their Destruction
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Arms Trade Treaty 104
Arms Trade Treaty Secretariat
Australia Group 114
Australia Group Secretariat
Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms 122
and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies
Wassenaar Arrangement Secretariat
Annex WTO members and their current status with the selected 130
international agreements and conventions
Abbreviations 144
Bibliography 146

International export regulations and controls 3
Foreword
The world has been confronted by multiple challenges in recent years. From the devastating health
and economic consequences caused by the COVID-19 pandemic to the growing impact of climate
change, these crises have risen alongside longstanding global concerns, such as alleviating poverty
and fostering sustainable development. International trade has a pivotal role to play in addressing these
pressing issues. However, the trading of certain products can entail risks, necessitating the need for
measures such as export licences and restrictions in certain circumstances to manage these risks.
Global cooperation has led to international agreements and conventions in a variety of areas, ranging
from protecting the environment to safeguarding public health, and promoting peace and security.
Many WTO members are party to conventions and agreements with these objectives, leading to
a wide range of export regulations and controls for the trading of controlled and sensitive goods.
The publication examines how these international agreements co-exist with WTO rules such as the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994 and the transparency requirements regarding
the procedures for the notification of quantitative restrictions.
While these international agreements have traditionally focused on regulations governing the importation
of controlled and sensitive goods, an increasing number include rules governing exports. Examples of
such agreements include the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora, more commonly known as CITES, the Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions on
hazardous chemicals and wastes, and the United Nations International Drugs Control Conventions.
This publication provides insights into some of the international agreements covering export regulations
aimed at environmental protection, hazardous waste management, weapons control and combating
the spread of illicit drugs, and would not have been possible without valuable contributions from the
secretariats and implementing bodies of the international agreements and conventions included in
this book.
The book is intended to serve as a guide for policymakers, government officials, academia and
members of the public with an interest in the areas covered. By fostering a better understanding of
the existing international agreements regulating exports and how they link to the multilateral trading
system, the WTO can help to strengthen global cooperation, promote transparency and perhaps
even inspire future agreements seeking to strike a balance between advancing international trade and
protecting the global community against potential risks.
Suja Rishikesh Mavroidis
Director
WTO Market Access Division

44 EInntrvoirdouncmtieonntal Protection
Introduction
WTO members utilize a wide range of measures, such as prohibitions, export licences,
regulations and other controls, to assist in risk management and regulating trade in controlled
and sensitive goods. Examples include measures for fulfilling specific environmental objectives,
the management of hazardous wastes and chemicals, combating illicit drugs and harmful
substances, contributing to international peace and weapons controls, and regulating trade
in cultural property. Many of these export licences and controls are established pursuant to
international agreements and conventions focused on these specific areas and are the result
of many years of international cooperation in the respective fields.
While some of these measures might be considered to be quantitative restrictions (QRs),
which are generally prohibited within WTO rules, members are permitted to apply them in
a limited number of situations. These can include exemptions from, and exceptions to, the
rules pursuant to Articles XI:2 and XII (Balance of Payments) of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994, respectively, as well as the general exceptions in Article XX
and the national security exceptions in Article XXI of the GATT 1994. In addition, QRs may
also be applied in accordance with certain specific exceptions provided under other WTO
agreements, such as the Agreement on Agriculture.
To ensure transparency, WTO members are required to notify every two years all QRs in force
pursuant to the WTO Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions1,
which is administered by the Committee on Market Access. For example, several WTO
members have notified that they maintain export restrictions in one form or the other,
including export controls such as prohibitions, restrictions or licences for trade in nuclear
materials, narcotic drugs and weapons, and several measures to protect the environment.
Members also have the possibility to indicate whether these prohibitions or restrictions stem
from international obligations undertaken outside the WTO framework. In practice, several
members have notified measures introduced pursuant to these agreements, including
inter alia the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer or the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora to protect
certain plants and animals against over-exploitation through international trade.
This publication is unique in exploring how this particular set of international agreements
and conventions operate in practice and how it is linked to the multilateral trading system.
Moreover, it is often difficult to find information on export-related measures. To bridge this
gap, this publication presents some of the international rules for export-related controls in
selected international agreements and explores the main ways such restrictions co-exist with
WTO rules. The aim of the publication is also to assist WTO members and the general public
in gaining a better understanding of the different mechanisms through which the export
of high-risk or controlled products is regulated pursuant to the international agreements

International export regulations and controls 5
and conventions beyond WTO rules. It will also aid delegates and capital-based officials in
preparing their notifications and will help them understand more clearly the type of information
that should be considered, thus increasing transparency.
The agreements and conventions included in the publication were selected based on the
presence of concrete provisions that seek to regulate exports, the extent to which WTO
members are party to them, and how often members refer to them in their QR notifications.
The publication begins with an overview of export restrictions and regulations under
WTO agreements, describing the relevant legal disciplines and notification requirements.
The chapters on the selected international agreements and conventions focus on how the
export regulations and controls under those instruments operate in practice in the following
areas: environmental protection; drugs control; and weapons and disarmament.
The chapters contained in Parts 1-3 were prepared or reviewed by the secretariats and
implementing bodies of the respective arrangements, agreements and conventions and
are attributable to them.2 They reflect the language and terminology used in the respective
agreements, which may be different from that used in context of the WTO agreements.
Accordingly, the use of such terms in those chapters does not reflect an endorsement by
the WTO Secretariat, and is without prejudice to WTO members’ status, or their rights
and obligations.
Endnotes
1 Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions, WTO document G/L/59/Rev.1,
3 July 2012.
2 The chapters “Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer” and “United Nations Security Council resolutions and export
controls” were prepared by the WTO Secretariat and reviewed by the respective organizations.

6 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
Export restrictions and regulations
under WTO agreements
The first section of this chapter explores the relevant provisions in WTO
agreements regulating export restrictions on goods. It begins by setting
out the rules that address the application or maintenance of such export
restrictions by members, followed by an examination of the flexibilities available
to members under specific circumstances. The second section discusses
the procedures and practices for the notification of export restrictions at the
WTO, in particular under the Decision on Notification Procedures that was
adopted by the Council for Trade in Goods in 2012.
Prepared by the WTO Secretariat.

International export regulations and controls 7
Legal disciplines regulating export restrictions
under WTO agreements
WTO rules governing export restrictions on goods are not set out in a dedicated treaty or
agreement.1 Rather, the relevant legal disciplines are contained in several multilateral treaties
on trade in goods negotiated by WTO members and annexed to the Agreement Establishing
the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement).2 The present chapter discusses these
disciplines with reference to the specific terms used in WTO agreements, which may not
be identical to terms used in other non-WTO legal instruments and frameworks discussed
in this publication. Where useful, the chapter also refers to the interpretation of the relevant
terms in WTO dispute settlement.
Obligation to Eliminate Export Prohibitions and Restrictions under
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1994)
Through General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994 Article XI (General Elimination
of Quantitative Restrictions), WTO members have agreed to pursue the elimination of export
restrictions. Paragraph 1 of Article XI provides (emphasis added):
“1. No prohibitions or restrictions other than duties, taxes or other charges, whether
made effective through quotas, import or export licences or other measures, shall be
instituted or maintained by any contracting party on the importation of any product of
the territory of any other contracting party or on the exportation or sale for export of
any product destined for the territory of any other contracting party.”
In WTO dispute settlement, the scope of GATT 1994 Article XI:1 has been understood to
be “broad” in that it envisages the elimination of all export prohibitions or restrictions, which
may be made operative through quotas, licences or any “other measures”.3 The requirement
in Article XI:1 to eliminate both “prohibitions” and “restrictions” has been interpreted to
constrain not only bans on the exportation of a good but also measures that have a “limiting”
effect on exportation.4 According to WTO panels and the Appellate Body, such a limiting
effect may result from measures that create uncertainties around exportation, create undue
delays or make exportation prohibitively costly, therefore modifying the competitive situation
of the exporter.5 They have further observed that the limiting effect of these measures need
not be quantified, and the potential to limit trade may be sufficient for a measure to constitute
a restriction on the exportation of a product within the meaning of Article XI:1.6
While export quotas are one possible example of measures with such limiting effect, the scope
of GATT 1994 Article XI:1 also extends to other measures. For instance, GATT and WTO
dispute settlement panels have found discretionary export licensing regimes and minimum
export price requirements to be inconsistent with Article XI:1.7 These panels have further

8 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
stated that although export licensing regimes may not be per se in violation of Article XI:1,
they can amount to a restriction inconsistent with Article XI:1, where licensing agencies have
unfettered or undefined discretion to reject a licence application, or when export licensing
practices lead to excessive delays.8
The Ad note to GATT 1994 Article XI clarifies that the term “export restrictions” includes
“restrictions made effective through state-trading operations”.9 According to the
interpretation of this Ad note in WTO dispute settlement, operations of a state-trading
entity that result in restrictions on exports may be inconsistent with the obligation under
GATT 1994 Article XI:1.10
Export prohibitions and restrictions under other WTO agreements
One specific application of the rule in GATT 1994 Article XI:1 can be found in the WTO’s
Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMs Agreement), which recognizes
that certain investment measures can have trade-restrictive and distorting effects. It prohibits
members from applying such measures insofar as they are inconsistent with GATT 1994
Article XI.11 To this end, the Agreement contains an illustrative list of trade-related investment
measures (TRIMs) that are considered inconsistent with GATT 1994 Article XI:1.12 With
respect to export restrictions, this illustrative list in the annex to the TRIMs Agreement states:
“2. TRIMs that are inconsistent with the obligation of general elimination of quantitative
restrictions provided for in paragraph 1 of Article XI of GATT 1994 include those which
are mandatory or enforceable under domestic law or under administrative rulings,
or compliance with which is necessary to obtain an advantage, and which restrict:
…….
(c) the exportation or sale for export by an enterprise of products, whether specified
in terms of particular products, in terms of volume or value of products, or in terms of
a proportion of volume or value of its local production.”
The WTO’s Agreement on Safeguards also disciplines a specific category of export restrictions.
Article 11.1(b) prohibits members from seeking, taking or maintaining any “voluntary export
restraints, orderly marketing arrangements or any other similar measures” on the export
side.13 Examples of other measures which afford protection in a manner similar to voluntary
export restraints and orderly market arrangements include export moderation, export-price
monitoring systems, export surveillance and discretionary export licensing schemes.14
Article 11.1(b) further clarifies that export measures prohibited under this provision include
both “actions taken by a single Member” and “actions under agreements, arrangements and
understandings entered into by two or more Members”.
Under Article 4 (and footnote 1) of the WTO’s Agreement on Agriculture, WTO members are
also precluded from resorting to or maintaining voluntary export restraints and similar border
measures other than ordinary customs duties in respect of agricultural products.

International export regulations and controls 9
Export restrictions under terms of accession
Any state or separate customs territory possessing full autonomy in the conduct of its external
commercial relations may accede to the WTO as a member.15 The terms of such accession
are contained in the accession protocol agreed upon by the applicant and WTO members,
as well as the report of the accession working party.
Terms of accession often include obligations of acceding members with respect to export
regulation, such as general and specific commitments in respect of export licensing. For
example, Tajikistan and Ukraine have committed to apply export licensing requirements in
conformity with WTO rules, including GATT 1994 Article XI.16 China’s Accession Protocol
provides for the publication and notification of export licensing requirements17, as well as
non-discrimination of foreign individuals and enterprises in the distribution of export licences.18
The Russian Federation has committed itself to eliminating such export authorization and
licensing requirements which cannot be justified under WTO provisions, as well as measures
having an “equivalent effect”. In addition, the Russian Federation specifically undertook
to ensure the WTO-consistency of its export licensing regime for precious stones and
metals, semi-precious stones, objects made thereof, certain alloys, semi-fabricates, ores,
concentrates and wastes.19
Exceptions and other provisions relating to the obligation to
eliminate export prohibitions and restrictions
The requirement under GATT 1994 Article XI:1 to eliminate export prohibitions and
restrictions co-exists with various provisions in the GATT 1994 and other WTO agreements
that members have relied upon to justify introducing or maintaining export restrictions.20
Below, some of these provisions are explored. As will be further elaborated in the next section,
the Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions (QR Decision) adopted
by the Council for Trade in Goods in 2012 requires members to notify all export restrictions
in force and the justification under the WTO rules for maintaining them.21
The text of GATT 1994 Article XI:1 indicates that the obligation to eliminate export restrictions
does not prevent members from levying export duties, export taxes or other export charges.22
These duties, taxes or charges may nevertheless be subject to other rules in the WTO covered
agreements, such as GATT 1994 Article X:3(a) requiring uniform, impartial and reasonable
administration of laws and regulations.23
GATT 1994 Article XI:2 also sets out limitations on the scope of Article XI:1 by excluding
specified export prohibitions or restrictions from the general rule on the elimination of
quantitative restrictions. It provides in relevant parts:
“2. The provisions of [Article XI:1] shall not extend to the following:
(a) export prohibitions or restrictions temporarily applied to prevent or relieve critical
shortages of foodstuffs or other products essential to the exporting contracting party;
(b) import and export prohibitions or restrictions necessary to the application of
standards or regulations for the classification, grading or marketing of commodities in
international trade; ...”

10 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
According to the interpretation of GATT 1994 Article XI:2(a) in WTO dispute settlement,
members may restrict or prohibit exports temporarily, that is for “a limited time” or on an
“interim” basis, to address critical shortages of foodstuffs or other essential products. Specific
WTO panels and the Appellate Body have considered an “essential” product within the
meaning of GATT 1994 Article XI:2(a) as one that is necessary or absolutely indispensable
to a particular member, taking into account the circumstances faced by that member at the
time it imposes the export restrictions. A “critical shortage” has been understood as referring
to deficiencies in quantity that are crucial or that reach a vitally important or decisive stage.
The phrase “prevent or relieve” in Article XI:2(a) has been interpreted to mean that members
may apply export restrictions to alleviate an existing critical shortage as well as in anticipation
of a critical shortage.24
With respect to agricultural products, the WTO’s Agreement on Agriculture further elaborates
the exemption in GATT 1994 Article XI:2(a). In particular, Article 12(1) of the Agreement on
Agriculture recognizes that members may restrict exports of foodstuffs in accordance with
GATT 1994 Article XI:2(a)25, and sets out procedural requirements to be observed by a
member instituting such a restriction.26 First, the acting member “shall give due consideration”
to the effects of such restriction on the food security of importing members. Second, the
acting member should notify the Committee on Agriculture in writing as far in advance as
practicable, with information as to the nature and duration of the restriction envisaged.27 Upon
request, the acting member shall also consult with any other member having a substantial
interest as an importer and provide necessary information to such member.
Additionally, GATT 1994 Article XI:2(b) permits WTO members to restrict or prohibit
exports to the extent “necessary” to apply standards or regulations for the classification,
grading or marketing of commodities. Whether an export restriction is “necessary” within the
meaning of Article XI:2(b) is a case-specific determination. For instance, the GATT panel in
Canada – Herring and Salmon noted that Canada applied quality standards to fish and
prohibited the export of fish not meeting these standards. The panel further noted, however,
that Canada prohibited exports of unprocessed salmon and herring even if they could meet
the standards generally applied to fish exports. The panel therefore found that these export
prohibitions could not be considered as “necessary” to the application of standards within
the meaning of Article XI:2(b).28
WTO members have also agreed that they may, on an exceptional basis and subject to
certain conditions, take measures that would otherwise be inconsistent with their obligations.
For instance, members may rely on the “General Exceptions” in GATT 1994 Article XX to
justify export restrictions that violate Article XI:1. GATT 1994 Article XX provides a closed
list of general exceptions, under which members may adopt or enforce export restrictions
that are inter alia:
“(a) necessary to protect public morals;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
…….
(d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to

International export regulations and controls 11
customs enforcement, the enforcement of monopolies operated under paragraph 4
of Article II and Article XVII, the protection of patents, trade marks and copyrights,
and the prevention of deceptive practices;
…….
(f) imposed for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or
archaeological value;
(g) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures
are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production
or consumption; …”
To be justified under GATT 1994 Article XX, an export restriction inconsistent with Article
XI:1 should pursue the objective(s) set out in the subparagraphs of Article XX. The export
restriction should also have the requisite nexus to the objective that it pursues (described
in the various subparagraphs of Article XX with terms such as “necessary to”, “relating to”,
“imposed for” and “essential to”). Some subparagraphs of Article XX contain additional
requirements. For instance, under GATT 1994 Article XX(g), members may adopt or enforce
an export restriction relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources “if such
measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or
consumption”.29 Finally, the availability of the general exceptions in GATT 1994 Article XX
is, according to the opening clause of that provision: “[s]ubject to the requirement that
such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary
or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or a
disguised restriction on international trade”.
In addition to these “General Exceptions” under Article XX, members may also seek to justify
export restrictions under the “Security Exceptions” in the GATT 1994. In particular, GATT
1994 Article XXI provides:
“Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed
…….
(b) to prevent any contracting party from taking any action which it considers necessary
for the protection of its essential security interests
(i) relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived;
(ii) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such
traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the
purpose of supplying a military establishment;
(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
(c) to prevent any contracting party from taking any action in pursuance of its
obligations under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.”
Finally, the WTO Agreement envisages that in exceptional circumstances, the WTO
Ministerial Conference may waive an obligation imposed on a member by that agreement.30
In granting such a waiver, the Ministerial Conference must state the circumstances justifying
its decision, the terms and conditions governing the application of the waiver, and the date

12 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
on which the waiver shall terminate. A waiver granted for a period of more than one year must
be reviewed annually until it expires, including for whether the exceptional circumstances
justifying the waiver continue to exist, and whether the terms and conditions attached to
the waiver have been met.31 These procedures have previously been utilized for providing
a waiver from the obligation in GATT 1994 Article XI:1 to eliminate export restrictions,
such as in respect of domestic measures to regulate the international trade in rough diamonds
consistent with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.32
Export prohibitions and restrictions under the
WTO: practice and notification procedures
To increase transparency on export restrictive measures, WTO members have agreed to
regularly notify all their prohibitions and restrictions on trade in goods under the QR Decision,
as adopted by the Council for Trade in Goods on 22 June 2012.33 Information contained in
members’ notifications is included in the WTO’s Quantitative Restrictions (QR) Database
(QR Database).34
This section discusses the treatment of QRs under GATT and the WTO Agreement and
their notification requirements, in particular under the 2012 QR Decision. It also provides
an overview of the contents of QR notifications based on the Secretariat’s factual analysis,
focusing on: (i) an overview of the QRs in force by notifying member; (ii) the trade flows
(i.e. imports or exports) affected and types of measure used; (iii) the categories of products
most affected; and (iv) the legal justifications provided by members. The discussion below is
based on measures that members have raised before official bodies of the WTO and have
considered relevant to WTO legal provisions on export restrictions.
Procedures for the notification of quantitative restrictions
With the establishment of the WTO in 1995, the Committee on Market Access was established
with the mandate to conduct, inter alia, “the updating and analysis of the documentation
on QRs and other non-tariff measures”35. On 1 December 1995, the Council for Trade
in Goods adopted a Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions36,
which had been approved by the Committee on Market Access on 31 October 1995,
and in 1997 a format for the notification of QRs37 was also adopted by this Committee.
A series of consultations that were held in 2009 on the timeliness and completeness of
notifications under the 1995 QR Decision revealed a number of aspects, including questions
concerning the type of measures that should be notified pursuant to the QR Decision,
whether such notifications should be circulated to all members, and how to deal with the
duplication of notifications between the Committee on Market Access and other bodies.
On 22 June 2012, the Council for Trade in Goods adopted a revised QR Decision38,
including a new format for notifications, to address the questions mentioned above, which
fully replaced the previous notification procedures.

International export regulations and controls 13
The QR Decision provides that members shall make “complete” notifications of all QRs in
force beginning on 30 September 2012 and in two yearly intervals thereafter. Changes that
take place between the complete notifications shall be notified “as soon as possible, but
not later than six months from their entry into force”. Although members have also the right
to notify that another member is imposing a QR, no such “reverse” notification has been
submitted so far.39 QR notifications are circulated under document symbol G/MA/QR/N and
are automatically included in the agenda of the Committee for review.
Scope of the 2012 QR Decision
The QR Decision requires members to notify all QRs in force, including import and export
related measures, as well as seasonal ones. According to the definition in GATT 1994
Article XI:1, QRs refer to all “prohibitions or restrictions other than duties, taxes or other
charges” applied by members on imports or exports of goods, which can be “made effective
through quotas, import or export licences or other measures”. However, as previously
explained, the provision does not provide a more detailed definition of what constitutes a
“quantitative restriction”.
Annex 2 of the QR Decision provides an indicative list of ten measures that are covered by
the notification requirements40, including the symbols to be used to identify them. These are:
• prohibitions;
• prohibitions except under defined conditions;
• global quotas;
• global quotas allocated by member;
• bilateral quotas (i.e. anything less than a global quota);
• non-automatic licensing procedures;
• QRs made effective through state-trading operations;
• mixing regulations;
• minimum prices triggering a QR;
• “voluntary” export restraints.
The following measures are explicitly excluded from the QR Decision: (i) measures covered
by the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures; (ii) measures covered by the
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade; (iii) automatic import licensing procedures; and
(iv) tariff rate quotas.
Notification format
Notifications pursuant to the QR Decision shall be made in accordance with the format
in annex 1 and submitted to the WTO Secretariat in electronic form. This annex requires
members to provide the following information for each QR: (i) a general description of the
QR; (ii) the type of restriction (based on the symbols in annex 2); (iii) the tariff line codes
of the products covered, including the Harmonized System (HS) version used; (iv) the
detailed product description for the corresponding tariff line(s); (v) the legal justification for

14 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
maintaining the measure; (vi) the national legal basis for the QR, including its entry into force
and the date it ceased to be in force, if known; and (vii) member’s comments, administration
of the restriction or modification of a previously notified measure.41
The QR Decision also acknowledges that some of the relevant measures may have already
been notified to other WTO bodies. To minimize duplication, the notification format allows
for a cross-reference to notifications made pursuant to other WTO provisions, such as the
Agreement on Agriculture, the Understanding on the Balance-of-Payments Provisions of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, the Agreement on Safeguards and the
Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures. Since the other notifications require different
types of information than that required by the QR Decision, the cross-references should also
provide the missing information.
Overview of quantitative restrictions notified by
WTO members
As mentioned earlier, the Committee on Market Access has the mandate to update and review
the documentation on QRs and other non-tariff measures. Information on these discussions
can be found in documents of this Committee, including in minutes of the meetings, yearly
reports on the status of notifications, and factual reports analysing the content and information
provided in the notifications received.42 The information contained in the QR notifications is
also compiled and analysed in the QR Database.
Based on the WTO Secretariat’s latest report43, as of 14 April 2023, 85 members (counting
the European Union as 27) had submitted notifications of QRs in force for some or all the
biennial periods. A total of 42 members submitted notifications for all biennial periods, whereas
12 members had submitted information for one biennial period only. Thus far, 41 members
have notified information for the current (2022-2024) biennial period. The QR Decision also
allows members to notify changes to their measures, which are usually circulated as addenda
to the initial notification. Changes may include modifications to existing QRs, as well as
introduction of new measures. To date, 56 members have notified changes to their measures,
that is almost 50 per cent of those that have at least notified once. It should be noted that
many of these notifications of changes relate to measures adopted by members in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic, especially in the biennial period 2020-2022.44 As noted, no
“reverse” notification has been received to date.45
According to the QR Database, the 85 members that have submitted QR notifications
maintain a total of 1,926 QRs that account for 2,406 measures. The terms “QR” and
“measure” are used in the relevant documentation and QR Database to identify two different
concepts, because each notified QR may be enforced through more than one measure.
For example, one QR could involve a conditional prohibition that is administered through a
non-automatic licencing procedure. For purposes of the QR database and this publication,
this QR is counted as two different measures.

International export regulations and controls 15
Type of restriction used and affected trade flows
Figure 1 shows that of the 1,702 measures currently in force, 59 per cent consist of import
measures, while the remaining 41 per cent are export-related measures. In terms of the
specific types of measure that have been notified overall, most of them are:
• non-automatic licensing procedures (NAL), of which 300 measures apply to
exports and 400 to imports;
• prohibitions (e.g. bans of certain products) (P), of which 203 apply to exports and
363 to imports;
• prohibitions except under defined conditions (i.e. conditional prohibitions) (CP),
of which 169 apply to exports and 219 apply to imports.
Quotas46, either global (GQ), allocated by country (GQC) or bilateral quotas (BQ), as well
as QRs made effective through state-trading operations (STR) represent a small percentage
of the total number of notified measures.
Figure 1. Number of measures notified, by type of restriction and affected
trade flow
Exports Imports
MPR
BQ
STR
GQC
GQ
CP
P
NAL
400 300 200 100 0 0 100 200 300 400
Number of measures
Source: WTO Secretariat based on the QR Database (https://qr.wto.org).
Note: BQ – bilateral quota; CP – conditional prohibition; GQ – global quota; GQC – global quota allocated
by country; MPR – minimum price triggering a quantitative restriction; NAL – non-automatic licensing;
P – prohibition; STR – quantitative restrictions made effective through state-trading.

16 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
Types of product affected
The rest of this section discusses solely export measures, which is the focus of this publication.
In terms of the products affected by export-related measures, Figure 2 shows that chemical
products are the most frequently affected, followed by optical and measuring instruments,
different types of machinery and pharmaceuticals.47 In terms of the specific HS Chapters,
with 114 QRs, Chapter 29 (Organic chemicals) is the most frequently affected, followed
by Chapter 28 (Inorganic chemicals) and Chapter 38 (Miscellaneous chemical products).
To put the chart into perspective, 53 export measures reference Chapter 03.
slacimehc
cinagrO
.92
slacimehc
cinagronI
.82
stcudorp
lacimehc
.csiM
.83
dna
lacidem
,lacitpO
.09
tnempiuqe
gnirusaem
slacituecamrahP
.03
yrenihcam
lacirtcelE
.58
suoicerp
,slraep
,sdnomaiD
.17
latem
suoicerp
dna
senots
yrenihcaM
.48
hsiF
.30
selcitra
dooW
.44
Figure 2. Top 10 HS chapters affected by export-related measures in the
QR notifications
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Source: WTO Secretariat based on the QR Database (https://qr.wto.org).

International export regulations and controls 17
WTO-related justifications
Paragraph 2(v) of the QR Decision requires members to provide “an indication of the grounds
and WTO justification for the measures maintained […] and the precise WTO provisions”,
which is indicative in nature and provided by members for transparency purposes only.48
Although members have most frequently cited at least one provision from GATT 1994 with
regard to export measures (95 per cent of the justifications in the QR dataset), they have also
mentioned other legal instruments such as waivers, provisions in WTO accession protocols
and the TRIPS Agreement. On the other hand, there are 25 export-related QRs where no
specific WTO provision has been cited.
Figure 3 shows that GATT 1994 was the most frequently cited WTO agreement in the dataset.
Under GATT 1994, the “General Exceptions” of Article XX were the most frequently cited:
266 export-related QRs (73 per cent of the total). Particularly relevant is the reference to
paragraph (b) of Article XX, which refers to measures “necessary to protect human, animal or
plant life or health”, which was cited in 38 per cent of the export measures in the dataset. The
“Security Exceptions” of Article XXI was referred to as justification for 108 (15 per cent) of the
notified export measures. Besides GATT 1994, members have also referred to a lesser extent
to other legal justifications, such as the Kimberley Process Waiver49 (eight export measures).
In several cases, reference has been made to an article in a WTO agreement in general
without providing further details (e.g. there have been 58 cases where the member simply
stated “Article XX”), or where the justification closely resembles the language of one of the
general exceptions in the GATT, but no specific provision was cited (e.g. “protection of animal
life and the environment”).
Other grounds for restrictions
Paragraph (v) of the QR Decision acknowledges that some of these measures are the result
of international cooperation beyond the WTO, and requires members to provide an indication
of the grounds for the measures maintained, including “any relevant international commitment
where appropriate”. Several notifications have expressly noted that the measures were
introduced pursuant to other arrangements, agreements or conventions outside of the
WTO framework. It is worth noting that while some members have included very detailed
information on other grounds for introducing restrictions, others have either avoided entirely
the references or provided limited information in this regard despite being parties to the
international agreements and conventions in question.
Table 1 shows the number of export-related QRs that have referred to international
agreements. The most frequently cited international conventions in the notifications
include CITES, the Montreal Protocol, the Rotterdam Convention, the Basel Convention,
the Stockholm Convention, as well as the main three UN conventions on narcotics and
psychotropic substances, among others.

18 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
Figure 3. Number of export-related QRs notified, by WTO provision cited
as justification
600
510
500
400
300
200
108
100
38
25
9 11
0
Not indicated Art. XI Art. XX Art. XXI Other GATT Other
GATT 1994
Article XX (General Exceptions) Article XXI (National Security)
Art. XX(b)
Art. XXI (in general)
266
24
Art. XXI(c)
40
26 34
Art. XX(d)
Art. XX(a)
25
58
Art. XX(f) 87 14 44
Art XX
(in general)
Art. XX(g) Art. XXI(b)
Art. XX other
Source: WTO Secretariat based on the QR Database (https://qr.wto.org).

International export regulations and controls 19
Table 1. Top-15 non-WTO agreements or conventions cited as grounds for
restrictions in the QR notifications
No. of QRs
Non-WTO agreements or conventions
(export only)
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna 44
and Flora (CITES), 1973
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, 1987 32
Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain 23
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade, 1998
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, 2001 18
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 18
Wastes and Their Disposal, 1989
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 17
Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971 17
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 16
Psychotropic Substances, 1988
Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and 13
Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, 1996
Minamata Convention on Mercury, 2013 11
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling 8
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction, 1993
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, 1985 7
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 5
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, 1970
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Code of Conduct on the 4
Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources, 2004
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas 3
(ICCAT), 1966
Source: WTO Secretariat based on the QR Database (https://qr.wto.org).

20 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
Other elements in the notifications
Paragraph 2(vii) of the QR Decision allows members to provide information on,
inter alia, the manner in which the restriction is administered, and whether it is applied on a
most-favoured-nation basis or to the trade with one or more trading partners. For example,
about two-thirds of the measures in the dataset include information on how the measure is
administered, or about which are the responsible entities, and what is the expected duration
of the measures, among other things. It is worth mentioning that since 2020 there has been
an improvement in the quality of the information provided, with more members indicating, for
example, the effective duration of certain measures as well as how certain restrictions are
administered or providing weblinks to the national legal basis. Several notifications provided
information on QR measures that impose prohibitions or restrictions on specific partners,
which are often related to resolutions by the United Nations Security Council50, or more
recently to COVID-19.

International export regulations and controls 21
Endnotes
1 The WTO agreements do, by contrast, include a dedicated Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures,
which recognizes that “the flow of international trade could be impeded by the inappropriate use of
import licensing procedures” and provides rules for the operation of import licensing regimes.
2 See Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement. Unlike conventions discussed in other chapters of this publication,
Annex 1A agreements are not limited to specific goods sectors but are generally applicable to trade in all
goods. An exception to this is the WTO’s Agreement on Agriculture, whose product coverage is limited
to “agricultural products” as defined in that agreement.
3 Panel Report, India – Quantitative Restrictions, para. 5.129. See also Panel Report, Argentina –
Hides and Leather, para. 11.17 (referring to “other measures” in GATT 1994 Article XI:1 as a
“broad residual category”).
4 Panel Report, India – Quantitative Restrictions, para. 5.128; Appellate Body Report, China – Raw
Materials, paras 319 and 320.
5 Panel Reports, Columbia – Ports of Entry, para. 7.240; China – Raw Materials, para. 7.1081.
6 Appellate Body Report, Argentina – Import Measures, para. 5.217; Panel Report, China – Raw Materials,
para. 7.1081.
7 Panel Report, China – Raw Materials, paras 7.957, 7.958, 7.1081 and 7.1082; GATT Panel Report,
Japan – Semi-conductors, paras 117 and 118.
8 Panel Report, China – Raw Materials, paras 7.957 and 7.958 (finding that the discretion that arises from
an undefined and generalized requirement to submit an unqualified number of “‘other’ documents” for
approval of licences amounts to a restriction inconsistent with Article XI:1). See also GATT Panel Report,
Japan – Semi-conductors, para. 118.
9 GATT 1994 Ad Articles XI, XII, XIII, XIV and XVIII. GATT 1994 Article XVII contains detailed rules on
‘State Trading Enterprises’ and provides that “if [a member] establishes or maintains a State enterprise,
wherever located, or grants to any enterprise, formally or in effect, exclusive or special privileges, such
enterprise shall, in its purchases or sales involving either imports or exports, act in a manner consistent with
the general principles of non-discriminatory treatment prescribed in [the GATT 1994] for governmental
measures affecting imports or exports by private traders” (emphasis added ).
10 See Panel Report, India – Quantitative Restrictions, paras 5.134 and 5.135 in the context of imports
effected through state trading enterprises.
11 Article 2 of the TRIMs Agreement.
12 See Panel Report, Colombia – Ports of Entry, para. 7.248 (noting that this illustrative list does not limit
the scope of GATT 1994 Article XI:1 to a finite category of measures).
13 See Goode (2007), who defines a “voluntary export restraint” or an “orderly marketing arrangement” as
a bilateral arrangement whereby an exporting country agrees to reduce or restrict exports so as to shield
the importing country from having to make use of quotas, tariffs or other import controls.
14 Agreement on Safeguards, Article 11.1(b), footnote 4.
15 Article XII of the WTO Agreement.
16 Tajikistan Working Party Report, para. 181; Ukraine Working Party Report, para. 255.
17 China’s Accession Protocol, para. 8.1 (committing to publish inter alia the names of the organizations
responsible for export authorization and licensing, procedures and criteria for obtaining export licences
or approvals, and the list of products subject to tendering requirements, export restrictions or export
prohibitions). See also Saudi Arabia Working Party Report, para. 179 (committing that, prior to accession,
the list of products subject to export licensing would be published in its official gazette).
18 China’s Accession Protocol, para. 8.2.
19 Russian Federation Working Party Report, paras 668 and 669.

22 Export restrictions and regulations under WTO agreements
20 For an overview, see https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/ai17_e/gatt1994_art11_oth.pdf,
referring to GATT 1994 Articles XI:2, XII (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments),
XVIII (Governmental Assistance to Economic Development), XIX (Emergency Actions on Imports),
XX (General Exceptions) and XXI (Security Exceptions), as well as the Agreement on Agriculture,
the Understanding on Balance of Payments, and the Agreement on Safeguards.
21 Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions, WTO document G/L/59/Rev.1,
3 July 2012.
22 See Panel Report, Argentina – Financial Services, para. 7.1067 (excluding a measure used for the
calculation of tax base from the scope of GATT 1994 Article XI:1 due to its “fiscal nature”).
23 See Panel Report, Argentina – Hides and Leather, paras 11.91-11.101 (finding that the involvement
of private parties with conflicting commercial interests in the administration of export duties was
unreasonable and partial administration, inconsistent with GATT 1994 Article X:3(a)).
24 See Appellate Body Report, China – Raw Materials, paras 323-328. See also Panel Report,
China – Raw Materials, paras 7.273-7.282.
25 See, however, Ministerial Decision on World Food Programme Food Purchases Exemption from
Export Prohibitions or Restrictions, WTO document WT/MIN(22)/29, 22 June 2022, adopted pursuant
to GATT 1994 Article XI and Article 12 of the Agreement on Agriculture. WTO members decided
not to impose any export prohibitions or restrictions on foodstuffs purchased for non-commercial
humanitarian purposes by the World Food Programme (WFP). This decision was taken in view of the
critical humanitarian support provided by the WFP, made more urgent in light of sharply rising levels of
global hunger. The decision also provides that it “shall not be construed to prevent the adoption by any
Member of measures to ensure its domestic food security in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the WTO agreements.”
26 Under Article 12(2) of the Agreement on Agriculture, developing country members are exempt from the
requirements of Article 12(1), unless they are net-food exporters of the specific foodstuff concerned.
27 The acting member, in line with the Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions,
must also notify all QRs, including those taken pursuant to Article 12(1) of the Agreement on Agriculture,
to the Committee on Market Access. This decision is discussed in more detail in the subsequent sections.
28 GATT Panel Report, Canada – Herring and Salmon, para. 4.2.
29 See Panel Report, China – Rare Earths, paras 7.568-7.599 (finding that the differences between the
timing and levels of production quotas and export quotas imposed on rare earths, as well as the different
product scopes of the two quotas, indicated that the export quota was not “made effective in conjunction
with restrictions on domestic production or consumption” within the meaning of GATT 1994 Article XX(g)).
30 WTO Agreement, Article IX:3.
31 WTO Agreement, Article IX:4.
32 See Extension of Waiver Concerning Kimberley Process Certification Scheme for Rough Diamonds,
WTO document WT/L/1039, 30 July 2018.
33 WTO document G/L/59/Rev.1.
34 See https://qr.wto.org.
35 WTO Committee on Market Access, WTO document WT/L/47, 17 February 1995, para. (d).
36 Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions, WTO document G/L/59, 10 January 1996.
37 Format for Notification of Quantitative Restrictions (Pursuant to the Decision Adopted by the Council for
Trade in Goods on 1 December 1995, G/L/59), WTO document G/MA/NTM/QR/2, 10 July 1997.
38 WTO document G/L/59/Rev.1.
39 More information on the notifications procedures are provided in the note by the Secretariat
Notification of Quantitative Restrictions (QRs): A Practical Guide, WTO document JOB/MA/101/Rev.2,
28 September 2018.

International export regulations and controls 23
40 The QR Decision specifies that measures and symbols in annex 2 are without prejudice to members’
rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement, and that they are “not intended to define or harmonize
the concept of quantitative restrictions under the WTO”.
41 WTO document G/L/59/Rev.1.
42 As required by paragraph 7 of the QR Decision, the WTO Secretariat annually circulates a report on
status of notifications under document series G/MA/QR. In addition, the Secretariat regularly produces a
report with factual information on the types of measure that have been notified, which is circulated under
document series G/MA/W/114.
43 Quantitative Restrictions: Factual Information on Notifications Received, WTO document G/MA/W/114/
Rev.5, 18 April 2023.
44 See the G/MA/W/157 and G/MA/W/168 document series.
45 Paragraph 5 of the QR Decision states that members shall be free to make reverse notifications of
measures maintained by other members. They shall use the format in annex 1 and complete all the
information required. These notifications will be included in the agenda of the Committee on Market
Access and the member subject to reverse notification will have two months to comment in writing.
In the absence of such a comment within the two months, the WTO Secretariat shall include the reverse
information in the database.
46 A quota is a restriction (i.e. an absolute volume) on the amount of a good that may be imported by,
or exported from, a country. It should not be confused with a “tariff quota” or “tariff rate quota” (TRQ),
which consist in the application of a reduced tariff rate (i.e. in-quota duty) for a specified quantity of
imported goods; imports above this specified quantity face a higher tariff rate (i.e. out-of-quota duty).
TRQs are commonly used for agricultural products. Footnote 1 of the QR Decision explicitly excludes
TRQs from its scope.
47 The calculation was based on the tariff codes provided in the notifications, including cases with
partial information. For 192 export measures, no precise HS codes are provided in the notification
(“Various” category).
48 Footnote 3 of WTO document G/L/59/Rev.1 provides, inter alia, that the “justification is provided for
transparency purposes only and is therefore indicative. It shall not prejudice any legal position a Member
may take on the particular measure that the justification is intended to cover.”
49 See WTO document WT/L/1039.
50 For example, see Notification Pursuant to the Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative
Restrictions (G/L/59/Rev.1), WTO document G/MA/QR/N/SGP/6, 14 April 2023.

1
Environmental
protection
Convention on International Trade in 26
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
CITES Secretariat
Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions 36
OECD Decision of the Council on the Control of 48
Transboundary Movements of Wastes Destined
for Recovery
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development
Vienna Convention for the Protection of 56
the Ozone Layer and Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer

26 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora (CITES) regulates trade in specimens of over 38,000 species.
It contains strict conditions under which international trade can be authorized
through the issuance of export permits or licences. The Convention was
adopted in 1973 and entered into force on 1 July 1975. At the time of writing,
CITES has 184 parties and regulates all major markets of the world.
Prepared by Sofie H. Flensborg (Chief of Unit, CITES Secretariat).

International export regulations and controls 27
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Background
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES) is an international agreement that aims to ensure that international trade in specimens
of wild animals and plants does not threaten the survival of the species.
Annually, international wildlife trade is estimated to be worth billions of dollars and to include
hundreds of millions of plant and animal specimens.1 This trade is diverse, ranging from live
animals, such as pets, and live ornamental plants to a vast array of wildlife products derived
from them, including food products, exotic leather goods, wooden musical instruments,
timber, tourist curios and medicines. Levels of exploitation of some animal and plant species
are high, and the trade in them, together with other factors such as habitat loss, is capable
of heavily depleting their populations and even bringing some species close to extinction.
Most wildlife species traded are not endangered, and an agreement to ensure the
sustainability of the trade is important to safeguard these resources for the future. Today,
CITES accords varying degrees of protection to more than 38,000 species of animals and
plants, some of them subject to significant commercial trade as live specimens, parts and
derived products.
As an international agreement, CITES is legally binding on the states parties and provides a set
of common minimum standards for international trade in the specimens of species regulated
by it. These need to be complemented by national legislation to ensure that the provisions
can be applied and enforced at the national level by the designated CITES management
authorities and mandated enforcement agencies, such as the police and customs authorities.
The ultimate decision-making body of the Convention is the Conference of the Parties (CoP),
established by Article XI. The CoP meets every three years to review the implementation of the
Convention and to consider any proposals put forward by parties to amend the Convention
appendices containing the species of animals and plants covered. In the years between the
CoP, the CITES Standing Committee provides guidance to the CITES Secretariat, oversees
implementation and manages compliance matters. It also prepares the meetings of the
CoP. The Animals Committee and the Plants Committee comprise experts serving in their
individual capacity who provide scientific advice and guidance to parties, the CoP and the
Standing Committee. The CITES Secretariat, based in Geneva and hosted by the United
Nations, provides support to the parties, governing bodies and their working groups.
CITES and the WTO have been connected since the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT)2. The exceptions contained in Article XX of GATT on measures necessary
to protect human, animal or plant life or health (para. (b)) and on measures relating to the
conservation of exhaustible resources (para. (g)) are particularly relevant. The importance of
CITES is evident in the landmark US–Shrimp dispute, which involved measures to protect
the endangered species of marine turtles.3

28 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
Trade measures
The species covered by the Convention are included in three different appendices:
(1) Appendix I includes species that are considered to be in danger of extinction and for
which international trade is generally prohibited to not further endanger the species.
In accordance with Article III, trade may be authorized in exceptional circumstances
for non-commercial purposes (e.g. for scientific purposes) and under strict conditions.
Approximately 3 per cent of the species covered by the Convention are included in
Appendix I (ca. 700 fauna species and 400 flora species).
(2) Appendix II includes species that are not necessarily at this point endangered but
could become so unless international trade is strictly regulated and controlled.
Trade in specimens of these species may be authorized by nationally designated CITES
management authorities under certain conditions, set out in Article IV. About 97 per cent
of the species covered by the Convention are included in Appendix II (ca. 5,000 fauna
species and 33,000 flora species).
(3) Appendix III includes species that are not endangered or threatened at the global level
but for which a party seeks the support of other countries in the control and monitoring
of trade by including the species in the Convention unilaterally. Such species must be
protected under national law in order to qualify for inclusion in Appendix III (Article V).
Less than 1 per cent of the species covered by the Convention are included in
Appendix III.
Substantive provisions
Articles III–V regulate international trade in specimens of species included in Appendices
I–III of the Convention. Trade is defined as export, import, re-export and introduction from the
sea.4 Introduction from the sea means that the specimen has been taken in an area not under
the jurisdiction of any state (i.e. outside the territory and outside the exclusive economic zone
of any country).5 The specimens may have been taken in the air, water or seabed.
Specimens include live, dead, parts, derivatives and final products, as well as specimens
produced through biotechnology.6 However, for certain species – in particular for plant
species – the specimens included or excluded by the Convention are further defined in
annotations or footnotes.
As mentioned above, most species are included in Appendix II and only those may be subject
to trade for commercial purposes. A nationally designated CITES management authority may
authorize the export of such specimens under the following conditions, set out in Article IV:
• The specimens must have been legally acquired (not poached or illegally logged). It is
responsibility of the trader to prove the legal origin of the goods presented for trade.

International export regulations and controls 29
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
• The trade must not have a detrimental impact on the survival of the species in the wild.
The nationally designated scientific authority must make a non-detriment finding
to confirm that the taking of the wild animals or plants is sustainable. The finding is
provided to the nationally designated CITES management authority before the trade
can be authorized.
• Live specimens to be traded must be prepared and shipped in a manner that minimizes
risks of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment. In practice, parties have agreed
that live animals and plants must comply with the relevant regulations agreed by the
International Air Transport Association.7
When these conditions are met, the nationally designated CITES management authority
may issue a CITES export permit.8 The parties have agreed on the information that must be
included on the permit (e.g. species name, quantity, type of specimen, source, purpose of the
trade). They have also agreed on a standard form for this permit that most parties use, with
small variations (see Figure 1).9
An export permit is valid for a maximum of six months from the date of issuance. A shipment
must reach the country of import before the export permit expires in order to be compliant
with the Convention. The importing party can only clear a shipment if it is accompanied by
a valid export permit. The Convention does not require importing parties to issue import
permits for trade in specimens of species included in Appendix II of the Convention. Some
parties have, however, adopted stricter domestic measures requiring an import permit to be
issued prior to the shipment of the goods from the exporting country. To authorize re-export,
the CITES management authority must ensure that the specimens were legally imported
before issuing a re-export certificate.
In the case of introduction of specimens of species from the sea, the CITES management
authority of the state of introduction (where the specimens will be first landed) must ensure
that the taking of the species is sustainable and in accordance with any international or regional
agreements applicable in the geographical location to the species concerned (e.g. regional
fisheries management agreements). The parties have agreed that in the case the vessel
registered in one state is landing the specimens taken in the high seas in another state, it is not
to be considered as introduction from the sea under the Convention, but regulated as trade.10
In this situation, the state in which the vessel is registered is considered to be the state of export;
and the state into which the specimens are transported is considered to be the state of import.
Parties have also made certain provisions to be applied in the case of chartering operations.11
The implementation of introduction from the sea requires coordination between the national
fisheries authorities and the CITES management authorities. The CITES Secretariat
is collaborating with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
facilitate this. The Secretariat has also compiled a list of questions and answers on CITES
and fisheries.12

30 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
Figure 1: Standard form for a CITES export permit

International export regulations and controls 31
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Exemptions and special provisions
Article VII contains several important exemptions and special provisions that allows
international trade to occur under different conditions and are described below.
Transit and transshipment
If a shipment is in transit through a territory and remains in customs control, no export permit
is needed for the transit country. However, an export permit is required for the final destination
(import country). If the shipment is transiting over land, it is unlikely that it remains in customs
control and therefore it must be considered as import into the country of transit and re-export
from this country and documents must be issued accordingly.13
Pre-Convention specimens
As noted above, new species are added to the Convention at every meeting of the CoP.
If the CITES management authority has proof that a specimen was legally acquired before
the provisions of the Convention applied to the species concerned, the authority may issue
a pre-Convention certificate to allow trade to occur in that specimen without verifying that
trade will not be detrimental to the survival of the species.14
Personal and household effects
The Convention allows for individuals to travel or undertake an international household move
with personal or household effects of species included in the appendices without an export
permit; this could include live pets, such as parrots. A special “certificate of ownership” exists
to allow frequent cross-border movement of personally owned live animals (used particularly
for falcons). However, in order to avoid any misuse of this exemption, parties have agreed
on a number of limitations and conditions for its application.15 In addition, some parties have
adopted stricter domestic measures and do not allow any trade cross-border movement of
personal and household effects without a CITES document.
Captive-bred animals and artificially propagated plants
The Convention contains special provisions for specimens that originate from artificial
propagation (plantations) or from captive breeding (wildlife farms). If the nationally designated
CITES management authority has proof that the specimen has been produced under certain
specified conditions and in a controlled environment, this may be sufficient to authorize trade
in that specimen. If the species concerned is included in Appendix I and the production is
commercial (i.e. the artificial propagation of species listed in Appendix I or the rearing of
falcons for falconry), the trade must be authorized under Article IV. This means that the trade
for commercial purposes may be authorized under conditions applicable to trade in species
listed in Appendix II. In addition, the facility must be registered in the CITES Registers16
by the nationally designated CITES management authority.

32 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
Scientific exchanges and non-commercial loans between
scientific institutions
Scientific institutions, including herbaria, laboratories and museums, can exchange herbarium
specimens or other dried or embedded museum specimens or live plant material without
CITES permits for non-commercial scientific purposes if they are included in the CITES
Registers by the CITES management authority. There are about 900 scientific institutions
currently registered.
Travelling exhibitions
It is possible for the nationally designated CITES management authority to give multi-year
and multi-entry permits to travelling exhibitions (e.g. plant exhibition, travelling zoo) under
certain conditions.
Stricter domestic measures
Parties to the Convention may adopt stricter domestic measures in accordance with
Article XIV. Many parties have done so (e.g. to require import permits as a condition for
accepting imports of species listed in Appendix II). This includes, inter alia, China, the
European Union and the United States. Other parties have adopted measures to limit the
use of some of the exemptions and special provisions mentioned above (e.g. with regard
to personal and household effects or with regard to specimens produced under controlled
conditions). Information on stricter domestic measures that has been communicated to the
CITES Secretariat is available in the country profiles on the CITES website.17
National implementation
National laws for implementing CITES is critical to ensure that trade in protected species is
legal, sustainable and traceable. Although the Convention is legally binding on states, it is
essential that CITES parties have adequate legislation, which is permanently up to date and
efficiently enforced. Adequate national legislation is key to effective wildlife trade controls by
the state agencies charged with implementing and enforcing the Convention. It is also a vital
prerequisite for ensuring that a party complies with the provisions of the Convention.
Parties’ national legislation for the implementation of the Convention should provide them
with the authority to:
• designate at least one CITES management authority and one scientific authority;
• prohibit trade in specimens in violation of the Convention;
• penalize such trade;
• confiscate specimens illegally traded or possessed.

International export regulations and controls 33
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
The CITES National Legislation Project provides the Secretariat with a mandate to analyse
parties’ legislation and place it in one of three categories, depending on whether these four
criteria are met. Some parties have incorporated CITES into broader biodiversity laws and
supplemented with regulations on international trade, whereas others have adopted specific
laws on trade in endangered species. In some jurisdictions, the Convention has direct
applicability which influences the nature of the national implementing legislation.
The status of the national legislation can be found on the CITES website.18 To date,
over 100 of the 184 parties have adopted adequate legislation and submitted this for
analysis by the Secretariat. Legislation of a few parties is available on the CITES website
in their original language. Additional legislation can be found in the ECOLEX database.19
A significant portion of the parties that do not yet have adequate legislation in place are
least-developed countries.
Compliance measures
The Convention takes a supportive and non-adversarial approach to compliance matters
with the aim of ensuring long-term compliance.20 Compliance matters may relate to a lack of
submission of annual reports, a lack of progress in adopting national implementing legislation,
a lack of implementation of the requirement to produce non-detriment findings under Article IV
as well as a lack of sufficient efforts to combat illegal trade of elephant ivory or specimens
of other species. In most cases of non-compliance, the CITES Standing Committee adopts
recommendations to assist the party concerned in addressing the identified shortcomings.
Sometimes, such recommendations may be accompanied by a recommendation to other
parties not to accept any exports from the party concerned until such time as the party has
complied with the recommendations. Such recommendations to suspend trade are only put
in place or withdrawn by the CITES Standing Committee and are always notified to the
parties.21 Currently, about 30 parties are subject to such recommendations.22
Trade data and species identification
Each year, parties must submit an annual report to the Secretariat comprising data on all
authorized trade (import, export, re-export and introduction from the sea) in accordance with
Article VIII(7)(a). Since 1975, the data have been compiled in the CITES Trade Database,
managed on behalf of the CITES Secretariat by the United Nations Environment Programme
World Conservation Monitoring Centre.23 The Trade Database contains almost 25 million
entries and is the only complete record of international trade in specimens of wild species of
animals and plants.
To understand whether the Convention applies to a certain product, it is important to
understand what species was used in the product and whether the species is included in
one of the three appendices. Species identification tools and materials are rapidly evolving
with the development of mobile apps and other tools.24

34 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
Recent developments and future prospects
Electronic licensing and customs control
At the time of its conception, there was no need to consider electronic and paperless permit
systems, and so the Convention envisaged that each shipment of specimens listed in CITES
is accompanied by a paper permit and that each shipment is inspected at the point of export
to ensure that the shipment corresponds to the permit in terms of species and quantities.
However, modern trade practices make it very complicated for some parties to ensure
inspection of each shipment of CITES species and to wet stamp a paper permit. This was
further exacerbated during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Many parties have initiated processes to move to electronic permitting systems, sometimes
based on the Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA). More recently, parties
have agreed on work on risk assessment and analysis for border control of species listed in
CITES. The Secretariat is mandated to develop guidance for a risk-based analysis related to
the process of inspection under the CITES permit system – basically helping parties develop
a system to prioritize the inspection efforts.
Illegal trade and wildlife crime
While legal, sustainable and traceable trade can have great benefits, illegal trade in wildlife
undermines conservation efforts and has devastating economic, social and environmental
impacts. The serious nature of wildlife crime is recognized and reflected in resolutions and
decision adopted at the highest levels by CITES parties and in other forums. The Sustainable
Development Goals specifically address illegal trade in wildlife through targets under Goal
15, and the United Nations General Assembly adopted the first resolution in 2015 on tackling
illicit trafficking in wildlife.25 A number of species listed in CITES are high value items targeted
by organized crime groups and includes rosewood, elephant ivory, rhino horn, various reptiles and
pangolin scales (UNODC, 2020). It is estimated that illegal trade in wildlife is worth up to US$ 20
billion per year (Nellemann et al., 2016), and wildlife is trafficked by some of the same organized
crime groups that are also trafficking drugs, humans and weapons.

International export regulations and controls 35
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Endnotes
1 CITES Secretariat (2022): “In this analysis we estimate the financial value of direct global exports of
CITES-listed species over the period 2016-2020 was approximately USD 1.8 billion for animal exports
and USD 9.3 billion for plant exports.”
2 See WTO/CITES (2015).
3 United States – Import Prohibition of Certain Shrimp and Shrimp Products: AB-1998-4, WTO document
WT/DS58/AB/R, 12 October 1998, paras 132 and 135.
4 Article I(c).
5 Article I(e).
6 See Trade in Readily Recognizable Parts and Derivatives, Resolution Conf. 9.6 (Rev. CoP19), para. 2(b).
7 See Transport of Live Specimens, Resolution Conf. 10.21 (Rev. CoP19), para. 2.
8 See https://cites.org/eng/parties/country-profiles/national-authorities for contact information.
9 See Permits and Certificates, Resolution Conf. 12.3 (Rev. CoP19), Annexes 1 and 2.
10 See Introduction from the Sea, Resolution Conf. 14.6 (Rev. CoP16).
11 More information on Introduction from the sea is available here: https://cites.org/eng/prog/ifs.php.
12 See https://cites.org/sites/default/files/eng/com/sc/74/E-SC74-51.pdf.
13 Transit and Transhipment, Res. Conf. 9.7 (Rev. CoP15).
14 Implementation of Article VII, Paragraph 2, Concerning ‘Pre-Convention Specimens’, Resolution Conf.
13.6 (Rev. CoP18).
15 Control of Trade in Personal and Household Effects, Resolution Conf. 13.7 (Rev. CoP17).
16 See https://cites.org/eng/resources/registers.php.
17 See https://cites.org/eng/parties/country-profiles.
18 See https://cites.org/eng/legislation.
19 See https://www.ecolex.org/result/?type=legislation.
20 CITES Compliance Procedures, Resolution Conf. 14.3 (Rev. CoP19).
21 It is possible to subscribe to CITES Notifications to the parties at https://cites.org/eng/newsletter/
subscriptions.
22 See https://cites.org/eng/resources/ref/suspend.php.
23 See https://trade.cites.org.
24 The CITES community is gathering this information at https://cites.org/eng/imp/identification_materials/
index.php.
25 Tackling Illicit Trafficking in Wildlife, resolution 69/314, UN document A/RES/69/314, 19 August 2015.

36 Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm
Conventions
The Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm (BRS) Conventions, also known as the
“Chemicals and Wastes Conventions”, aim at addressing the harmful effects
of hazardous chemicals and wastes, essentially through regulating their
production, use, international trade and disposal. Although being in essence
multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs), this chapter shows how
they are interlinked to the multilateral trading system, through international
trade-related aspects explicitly embodied in their respective provisions –
in particular on export control systems.1
Prepared by Malika Amélie Taoufiq-Cailliau (Legal Officer, Secretariat of the Basel, Rotterdam
and Stockholm Conventions), who contributed in a personal capacity.

International export regulations and controls 37
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Background
The BRS Conventions2 comprise the following three international legal instruments:
• The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and their Disposal (Basel Convention);
• The Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade (Rotterdam Convention);
• The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (Stockholm Convention).
Nearly all members of the United Nations are parties to the Basel and Stockholm Conventions;
and most parties to the BRS Conventions are also WTO members. The former has 190
parties, the latter 186; and there are 165 parties to the Rotterdam Convention.
Although the BRS Conventions were adopted in different years, they share the common
objectives of protecting human health and the environment from the harmful effects of
hazardous chemicals and wastes:
(i) Concerning wastes: the Basel Convention was adopted on 22 March 1989, and
entered into force on 5 May 1992.
(ii) Concerning chemicals: the Rotterdam Convention was adopted on 10 September 1998
and entered into force on 24 February 2004; the Stockholm Convention was adopted
on 22 May 2001 and entered into force on 17 May 2004. Both conventions explicitly
recognize that trade and environmental measures should be “mutually supportive” with
a view to achieving sustainable development.
Primary purposes of the BRS Conventions
The overall rationale and primary purposes of the BRS Conventions were to set a level playing
field between developing and developed countries by establishing a common understanding
through an internationally applicable framework on the management of hazardous chemicals
and wastes. At the same time, the BRS Conventions did not prevent countries that wished
to do so from going further in the protection of human health and the environment.
Basel Convention on hazardous and other wastes
More specifically, the Basel Convention was designed to address serious concerns on
and prevent dumping of hazardous wastes and other wastes (e.g. household waste) from
developed countries to developing countries, based on three pillars:
• ensuring their environmentally sound management (ESM);
• regulating their transboundary movements (TBM);
• realizing the minimization of their generation, whether quantitatively or qualitatively
(degree of hazards), and thus favouring their disposal closer to their source of generation.

38 Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions on hazardous chemicals
For the hazardous chemicals and pesticides listed under the Rotterdam Convention,
the provisions were originally crafted in order to promote shared responsibility and
cooperative efforts between countries and to allow better informed decisions as to their
imports and exports, through establishing an information exchange platform with respect to
the substances banned or restricted within the jurisdictions of parties.3
For persistent organic pollutants (POPs), which are chemicals that are long lasting,
long range, bio-accumulating and highly toxic to humans and wildlife, the Stockholm
Convention responds to the need by prohibiting, restricting or phasing out their production,
use, trade, release and storage.
Only a small percentage of chemicals that could be considered harmful to the environment
and human health actually fall under the respective scopes of the Rotterdam and
Stockholm Conventions.
In their decisions, the respective Conferences of the Parties (CoPs) to the BRS Conventions
– the conventions’ governing bodies – may however consider and decide e. g. to list additional
hazardous chemicals and wastes to their annexes. Thus, the BRS Conventions can evolve to
adapt, modifying their scope as needed, notably to enhance their effectiveness and to meet
new challenges that may arise.
Trade-related measures and export control
systems under the BRS Conventions
Trade-related measures4 – in particular those on export controls – may play a key role for
the ESM of hazardous chemicals and wastes. With regard to export controls and licensing,
some very specific procedures are pivotal under the Basel and the Rotterdam Conventions,
as they lie at the heart of their respective regulatory import and export control systems:
the prior informed consent (PIC) procedures, which are the core export control systems
under these two MEAs.
Under the Stockholm Convention, there are other types of measures enshrined in its
provisions that may affect trade to a certain extent, and participate in export control.
However, there is neither an established PIC procedure nor any similar export
control mechanism.
The Ban Amendment, under the Basel Convention, which entered into force in December
2019, can be considered a unique export control instrument in itself. Adopted in 1995,
some parties considered that the Basel Convention was too limited in terms of its scope and
therefore believed that a total ban on the shipment of all hazardous wastes to developing
countries was needed.

International export regulations and controls 39
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
The prior informed consent procedure under the Basel Convention
The PIC procedure is set out in detail in Article 6 of the Basel Convention, to control the
transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and other wastes, by means of:
• notifying, by an exporting party to an importing party, that the former intends to export
to the latter a shipment of hazardous wastes or other wastes – exporters must provide
accurate information about hazards relating to the wastes;
• consenting, by an importing party, in writing, after being properly informed, to a proposed
shipment of those hazardous wastes and other wastes.
For the purpose of the PIC procedure, the Basel Convention provisions require the shipments
of hazardous wastes and other wastes to be properly packaged, labelled and transported,
with adequate international shipment or notification/movement documents5 from their point
of origin to their point of disposal or recycling. Parties, within the jurisdictions of which the
wastes are merely in transit, may also refuse the transit, as the PIC procedure may also
apply to them – even if they are not parties to the Basel Convention (see Article 7 of the
Basel Convention).
There is a “duty to re-import” (i.e. to take back) on the exporter if the wastes in question cannot
be disposed of in an environmentally sound manner (see Article 8 of the Basel Convention).
As a consequence, according to Article 9(1) of the Basel Convention, any transboundary
movement of hazardous wastes or other wastes is deemed to be “illegal traffic” in the
following cases:
“(a) without notification pursuant to the provisions of this Convention to all States
concerned; or
(b) without the consent pursuant to the provisions of this Convention of a State
concerned; or
(c) with consent obtained from States concerned through falsification,
misrepresentation or fraud; or
(d) that does not conform in a material way with the documents; or
(e) that results in deliberate disposal (e. g. dumping) of hazardous wastes or
other wastes in contravention of this Convention and of general principles of
international law.”
More specifically, as per Article 9(2), when the illegal traffic is:
“the result of conduct on the part of the exporter or generator, the State of export shall
ensure that the wastes in question are:
(a) taken back by the exporter or the generator or, if necessary, by itself into the
State of export, or, if impracticable,
(b) are otherwise disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Convention,

40 Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
within 30 days from the time the State of export has been informed about the illegal
traffic or such other period of time as States concerned may agree. To this end the
Parties concerned shall not oppose, hinder or prevent the return of those wastes to
the State of export.”
Therefore, each party to the Basel Convention has to adopt appropriate implementing
legislation to comply with its obligations under the Convention on preventing and punishing
illegal traffic, making it an environmental crime. Parties are to cooperate with each other to
implement the provisions on illegal traffic and to improve the ESM of hazardous wastes.
The prior informed consent procedure under the
Rotterdam Convention
Under the Rotterdam Convention, there is no ban or prohibition. Rather, a platform
is established to exchange information and to allow more environmentally sound
international trade of certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides. Along with the exchange
of information, the PIC procedure is one of the key pillars of the Rotterdam Convention,
applying to all hazardous industrial chemicals and pesticides listed under its Annex III,
and is a formal mechanism for: (i) notifying whether the parties wish to receive imports
of the chemicals and pesticides; and (ii) ensuring compliance with these decisions by
exporting parties.
The mechanism enables the dissemination of decisions by importing parties on whether
they accept the receipt of future shipments of hazardous industrial chemicals and pesticides
listed under Annex III – to which exporting parties have to abide.
The provisions require that each party informs the Secretariat of the Rotterdam Convention6
when taking a national regulatory action to ban or severely restrict a chemical or pesticide
within its jurisdictions.
For chemicals and pesticides subject to the PIC procedure:
• Parties intending to export a hazardous chemical or pesticide must first verify that the
importing party consents to the import.
• Parties intending to export a hazardous chemical or pesticide that is not listed under the
Rotterdam Convention, yet that is nevertheless subject to bans or severe restrictions
within its own territory, must notify the importing party of the proposed export and its
own national restrictions.
Articles 5 to 7 as well as Article 9 of the Rotterdam Convention set out the procedures
(i) for the inclusion of relevant chemicals to list in Annex III that are subject to the PIC
procedure, and (ii) for the removal of chemicals from Annex III.
Essential documents for the PIC procedure include:
• decision guidance documents (see Article 7 of the Rotterdam Convention) to help

International export regulations and controls 41
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
parties to assess risks when making informed decisions about the future import and use
of the chemicals and pesticides in question;
• PIC circulars, published by the Secretariat every six months, on the import responses by
parties (i.e. decisions on future imports of chemicals listed in Annex III) (see Article 10
of the Rotterdam Convention).
In addition, Articles 11 to 13 of the Rotterdam Convention set out obligations that have an
impact on the control of imports and exports of both the chemicals listed in Annex III, which
are subject to the PIC procedure, and the chemicals that are banned or severely restricted
but are not listed in Annex III.
In terms of export control, Article 11 sets out specific obligations related to the export of
chemicals listed in Annex III, according to which exporting parties are required to ensure that
exports of hazardous chemicals and pesticides subject to the PIC procedure do not occur
contrary to the decisions by importing parties. Article 11(1)(b), states that each exporting
party shall:
“Take appropriate legislative or administrative measures to ensure that exporters
within its jurisdiction comply with decisions in each response no later than six months
after the date on which the Secretariat first informs the Parties of such response in
accordance with paragraph 10 of Article 10”.
Article 11(2), in addition, states that:
“Each Party shall ensure that a chemical listed in Annex III is not exported from
its territory to any importing Party that, in exceptional circumstances, has failed to
transmit a response or has transmitted an interim response that does not contain an
interim decision ...”
Article 12 on export notifications is more relevant for chemicals not listed in Annex III and
indeed provides that:
“1. Where a chemical that is banned or severely restricted by a Party is exported
from its territory, that Party shall provide an export notification to the importing Party.
The export notification shall include the information set out in Annex V.”
However, the obligations of a party set out in the above referred Article 12, paragraph 1,
ceases when the chemical has been listed in Annex III (see Article 12(5)(a)).
Article 13 sets out various requirements applying to Annex III-listed and non-listed hazardous
chemicals and pesticides:
“1. The Conference of the Parties shall encourage the World Customs Organization
to assign specific Harmonized System customs codes to the individual chemicals or
groups of chemicals listed in Annex III, as appropriate. Each Party shall require that,
whenever a code has been assigned to such a chemical, the shipping document for

42 Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
that chemical bears the code when exported.
“2. Without prejudice to any requirements of the importing Party, each Party shall
require that both chemicals listed in Annex III and chemicals banned or severely
restricted in its territory are, when exported, subject to labelling requirements that
ensure adequate availability of information with regard to risks and/or hazards to
human health or the environment, taking into account relevant international standards.
“3. Without prejudice to any requirements of the importing Party, each Party may
require that chemicals subject to environmental or health labelling requirements in its
territory are, when exported, subject to labelling requirements that ensure adequate
availability of information with regard to risks and/or hazards to human health or the
environment, taking into account relevant international standards.
“4. With respect to the chemicals referred to in paragraph 2 that are to be used for
occupational purposes, each exporting Party shall require that a safety data sheet
that follows an internationally recognized format, setting out the most up-to-date
information available, is sent to each importer.
“5. The information on the label and on the safety data sheet should, as far as
practicable, be given in one or more of the official languages of the importing Party.”
The Stockholm Convention Article 3 on measures to reduce or
eliminate releases from intentional production and use of persistent
organic pollutants
The provisions embodied under Article 3 of the Stockholm Convention are among the most
relevant in terms of trade-related measures and export control because they directly affect
the control and licensing of exports of the listed POPs. They set out requirements on both
exporting (e.g. certification) and importing parties (e.g. ESM) for the international trade of
POPs listed as prohibited (in Annex A) or restricted (in Annex B). Yet, they take into account
applicable registered “specific exemptions” or “acceptable purposes”.
Article 3(1) more specifically states in this respect that each party shall prohibit and/or take
the legal and administrative measures necessary to eliminate its import and export of the
chemicals listed in Annex A in accordance with the provisions of Article 3(2), as follows:
“2. Each Party shall take measures to ensure:
(a) That a chemical listed in Annex A or Annex B is imported only:
(i) For the purpose of environmentally sound disposal as set forth in paragraph 1 (d)
of Article 6; or
(ii) For a use or purpose which is permitted for that Party under Annex A or Annex B;

International export regulations and controls 43
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
(b) That a chemical listed in Annex A for which any production or use specific
exemption is in effect or a chemical listed in Annex B for which any production or
use specific exemption or acceptable purpose is in effect, taking into account any
relevant provisions in existing international prior informed consent instruments,
is exported only:
(i) For the purpose of environmentally sound disposal as set forth in paragraph 1 (d)
of Article 6;
(ii) To a Party which is permitted to use that chemical under Annex A or Annex B; or
(iii) To a State not Party to this Convention which has provided an annual
certification to the exporting Party. Such certification shall specify the intended
use of the chemical and include a statement that, with respect to that chemical,
the importing State is committed to:
a. Protect human health and the environment by taking the necessary measures
to minimize or prevent releases;
b. Comply with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 6; and
c. Comply, where appropriate, with the provisions of paragraph 2 of Part II
of Annex B.
The certification shall also include any appropriate supporting documentation,
such as legislation, regulatory instruments, or administrative or policy guidelines.
The exporting Party shall transmit the certification to the Secretariat within sixty
days of receipt.
(c) That a chemical listed in Annex A, for which production and use specific
exemptions are no longer in effect for any Party, is not exported from it except
for the purpose of environmentally sound disposal as set forth in paragraph 1 (d)
of Article 6;
(d) For the purposes of this paragraph, the term ‘State not Party to this Convention’
shall include, with respect to a particular chemical, a State or regional economic
integration organization that has not agreed to be bound by the Convention with
respect to that chemical.”
A unique export control measure under the Basel Convention
Ban Amendment
In terms of export control, the Ban Amendment under the Basel Convention is also
noteworthy. It requires that each party listed in Annex VII to the Basel Convention (i.e.
members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the European
Union, Liechtenstein”) shall: (i) prohibit all transboundary movements of hazardous wastes
destined for final disposal to states not listed in Annex VII; and (ii) prohibit all transboundary
movements of hazardous wastes destined for reuse, recycling or recovery operations to
states not listed in Annex VII.

44 Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
Case studies
As mentioned above, one of the primary purposes of the BRS Conventions is to establish
a level playing field between developing and developed economies, without preventing
economies that wish to do so to go further in the protection of human health and the
environment. When examining the implementation of the BRS Conventions, it is imperative to
recognize that such national experiences may also vary not only due to economic and social
considerations but also depending on the type of legal system and how international law and
treaties are integrated with national law.
European Union: the REACH Regulation and other EU legislation
impacting the export of hazardous chemicals and wastes
The Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) Regulation
sets out the EU regulatory framework applicable to, in principle, all chemicals, and was
adopted to improve the protection of human health and the environment.7 In force in all
EU Members since 1 June 2007, it also applies to three members of the European Free
Trade Association (Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway).
To comply with the REACH Regulation, companies must identify and manage the risks
linked to the substances they produce or market. The burden of proof is placed on
them and therefore, they have to demonstrate to the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA) how the substance can be safely used; also, they must communicate the risk
management measures to the users.8 Authorities can ban hazardous substances if their
risks are considered unmanageable or may decide to restrict a use or make it subject to
a prior authorization.
ECHA provides guidance documents9 and answers to frequently asked questions10 to assist
companies, including manufacturers or exporters established outside the European Union, in
complying with the REACH Regulation. National help desks can also be reached directly.11
Additional EU legislation handled by ECHA contributes to regulating chemicals and wastes
ESM12, notably by controlling exports through, for example:
• The PIC Regulation, in force since 1 March 2014, relating to the import and export
of certain hazardous chemicals, with obligations on companies exporting to countries
outside the European Union;13
• The POPs Regulation of 20 June 2019, as amended in 2022, to ban or severely restrict
the production and use of POPS in the European Union;14
• The Waste Framework Directive, in force since July 2018, with measures addressing the
adverse impacts of the generation and management of waste on the environment and
human health, and for improving efficient use of resources considered crucial for the
transition to a circular economy.15

International export regulations and controls 45
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Côte d’Ivoire: measures implementing the BRS Conventions
In August 2006, toxic waste originating from the Probo Koala, a vessel chartered by a
private trading company, was dumped at several sites in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, reportedly
causing deaths and prompting tens of thousands of residents to seek medical attention.16
This triggered essentially:
(i) The adoption of a specific decision by the Basel Convention Conference of the Parties
condemning the dumping of wastes in Abidjan and calling for specific actions.
(ii) The implementation of the emergency plan developed by the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire.
(iii) The implementation of a programme of action, which involved several international
organizations cooperating altogether with national and local actors, notably in the
delivery of technical assistance and capacity building activities to better equip relevant
local as well as governmental authorities to fulfil two key objectives:
• to strengthen the capacity of Abidjan and its port to manage hazardous wastes,
including waste generated at sea, in an environmentally sound manner;
• to strengthen the capacity of Côte d’Ivoire and other countries in the region to
monitor and control the transboundary movements of chemicals and hazardous
wastes and ensure their ESM.
In principle, national jurisdictions within Côte d’Ivoire may refer to and directly rely on the BRS
Conventions, giving them full effect in court decisions, since these MEAs are considered as
self-executing treaties under this country’s constitutional legal system: that is, international law
prevails over national law and as a result, direct effect and primacy is granted to international
treaties, which become judicially enforceable upon ratification, without in principle having
to wait for implementing legislation. Among the actions to prevent such an incident from
happening again, the national regulatory framework applicable to chemicals and wastes had
also had to be improved, with the adoption of several measures in order to more adequately
implement the specific requirements under the BRS Conventions. These have led eventually
to better prepared authorities, with more adapted mechanisms and procedures in place –
in particular, concerning export control.17
Costa Rica: coordinating the management of chemical substances
In 2006, a mechanism was established to coordinate the management of chemical
substances – through the Secretaría Técnica de Coordinación para la Gestión de Sustancias
Químicas18 – to support national competent authorities and act as a focal point of, among
other MEAs, the BRS Conventions. Its objective is to provide effective and efficient guidance
on national chemicals management, involving institutions representing the government
(e.g. customs authorities), academia, civil society, agricultural and industry. Some elements
of its work plan are risk assessment and reduction and capacity building, and activities on
the following topics:

46 Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
• pesticide management plans
• used oils or sludge
• mercury
• chemical safety, including chemical emergencies
• sustainable purchases
• illegal traffic
• Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS).
Other initiatives include the harmonized customs classification codes and the close
coordination with customs authorities for all chemicals covered by not only the BRS
Conventions but also the Chemical Weapons Convention to allow better import and export
control of regulated substances or to prevent illegal traffic.
Multilateral trade and the BRS Conventions
The extent to which the multilateral trading system and the BRS Conventions relate and
are “mutually supportive” is explicitly referred to in the preambles to the Stockholm and
Rotterdam Conventions. Under the Basel Convention, such a relationship was not originally
reflected in its provisions, being adopted in 1989 (i.e. before the 1994 Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization), but it was discussed later through its governing
body and by means of several CoP decisions.
The Stockholm Convention states that the parties recognize “that this Convention and other
international agreements in the field of trade and the environment are mutually supportive”.
The Rotterdam Convention expands the statement by specifying that the parties are aware of
the “harmful impact on human health and the environment from certain hazardous chemicals
and pesticides in international trade”, and recognizes that “trade and environmental
policies should be mutually supportive with a view to achieving sustainable development”.
The preamble concludes by expressing the determination to “protect human health, including
the health of consumers and workers, and the environment against potentially harmful impacts
from certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade”.
The BRS Conventions, through their processes, mechanisms and procedures in place,
notably the trade-related measures, are thus well placed to address the challenges caused
by the production, the use, the international trade, and the disposal of hazardous chemicals
and wastes, contributing to control, in a more environmental and sustainable fashion, their
imports and exports.
They are at the heart of key global tools tackling climate change, pollution and biodiversity
loss. In 2019, amendments to annexes to the Basel Convention – known as the Plastic
Waste Amendments – were adopted, making the Basel Convention the only legally binding
international instrument to respond to this type of pollution.
Among the options for future considerations is a need to further expand technical discussions
on improving the export control systems and licensing of the BRS Conventions, including

International export regulations and controls 47
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
on the PIC procedures themselves, whether generally (e.g. at discussions on environmental
goods) or more specifically and thematically (e-waste, plastics, labelling, customs) at the level
of both the WTO – at the Committee on Trade and Environment – and under other instances
relating to market access or technical barriers to trade. Similarly, at the BRS Conventions
CoPs, the adoption of more specific intertwined decisions so as to enhance the dialogue
and consistencies can assist in overcoming possible silos between, on one hand, the trade
community and forums and the WTO membership, and on the other hand, the environmental
community and forums and the parties to MEAs, leading eventually to more sustainable trade,
development and better protection of the planet.
Endnotes
1 For more information on how the BRS Conventions function and on how they may be considered mutually
supportive with the WTO agreements, see the forthcoming online course “The BRS Conventions and the
WTO: Enhancing International Cooperation for Sustainable Development”, available on the WTO e-learning
platform at https://www.learning.wto.org.
2 See http://www.brsmeas.org.
3 The Rotterdam Convention does not set out a ban but instead establishes an information exchange platform
to allow more sustainable trade.
4 For more information on trade-related measures present in the BRS Conventions and other MEAs,
see https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/envir_e/envir_matrix_e.htm.
5 For more information on these notification and movement documents, please see at http://www.basel.int/
Procedures/NotificationMovementDocuments/tabid/1327/Default.aspx
6 The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) jointly perform the secretariat functions for the Rotterdam Convention.
7 Regulation (EC) No. 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006
concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing
a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC)
No. 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No. 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and
Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC.
8 See https://echa.europa.eu/regulations/reach/understanding-reach.
9 See https://echa.europa.eu/support/guidance.
10 See https://echa.europa.eu/support/qas.
11 See https://echa.europa.eu/support/helpdesks.
12 See https://echa.europa.eu/legislation.
13 Regulation (EU) No. 649/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 concerning
the export and import of hazardous chemicals (recast).
14 Regulation (EU) 2019/1021 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on persistent
organic pollutants (recast).
15 Directive (EU) 2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending
Directive 2008/98/EC on waste.
16 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/press-releases/2009/10/toxic-waste-un-expert-releases-report-probo-koala-incident
and https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-release/un-environment-releases-independent-audit-sites-
affected-toxic-waste?_ga=2.171237792.1444052210.1679301497-1501661496.1679301497.
17 See the Government’s online portal on export procedures of dangerous products, available at https://pwic.
gouv.ci/procedures-exportations/dechets-dangereux.
18 See http://secretariasq.digeca.go.cr.

48 OECD Decision OECD/LEGAL/0266 on transboundary movements of wastes
OECD Decision of the Council on the
Control of Transboundary Movements
of Wastes Destined for Recovery
Since March 1992, transboundary movements of wastes destined for
recovery operations between members of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) have been supervised and
controlled under the specific intra-OECD Control System. Established by
the Decision of the Council on the Control of Transboundary Movements
of Wastes Destined for Recovery Operations (OECD/LEGAL/0266),
the OECD Control System for waste recovery aims at facilitating trade of
recyclables in an environmentally sound and economically efficient manner
by using a simplified procedure, as well as a risk-based approach to assess
the necessary level of control for materials. It is closely interlinked with the
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and their Disposal. However, compared to the Basel Convention,
the OECD Decision gives a simplified and more explicit means of controlling
movements of covered wastes. It also facilitates transboundary movements of
recoverable wastes between OECD members in the case where an OECD
member is not a party to the Basel Convention. Wastes exported outside
the national jurisdiction of any OECD member, whether for recovery or final
disposal, do not benefit from this simplified control procedure.
Prepared by Frithjof Laubinger, Shunta Yamaguchi, Peter Börkey and Katarina Svatikova
(Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).

International export regulations and controls 49
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Background
The control of transboundary movements of waste, in particular that of hazardous wastes,
has been a concern to OECD members since the early 1980s. A number of OECD legal
instruments relating to transboundary movements of waste were enacted as early as
1984 with the Decision-Recommendation of the Council on Transfrontier Movements of
Hazardous Waste (OECD/LEGAL/0209).
Since March 1992, transboundary movements of waste destined for recovery operations
between OECD members have been supervised and controlled according to the OECD
Council Decision on the Control of Transfrontier Movements of Wastes Destined for
Recovery Operations (C(92)39/FINAL). In June 2001, the Decision was revised and
became Decision of the Council on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Wastes
Destined for Recovery Operations (OECD/LEGAL/0266) (hereafter “the OECD Decision”).
The OECD Decision establishes the framework for the specific intra-OECD Control System
for transboundary movements of recoverable wastes and establishes rules for trade in waste
in an environmentally sound and economically efficient manner.
The OECD Decision is closely interlinked with the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (Basel Convention).
However, compared to the Basel Convention, it gives a simplified and more explicit means of
controlling movements of covered wastes. The OECD Decision also facilitates transboundary
movements of recoverable wastes between OECD members in the case where an OECD
member is not a party to the Basel Convention. Wastes exported outside the national
jurisdiction of any OECD member, whether for recovery or final disposal, do not benefit from
this simplified control procedure.
The OECD Decision is a multilateral agreement, which is compatible with the environmentally
sound management of hazardous wastes and other wastes pursuant to Article 11(2) of the
Basel Convention:
“Parties shall notify the Secretariat of any bilateral, multilateral or regional agreements
or arrangements referred to in paragraph 1 and those which they have entered into
prior to the entry into force of this Convention for them, for the purpose of controlling
transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and other wastes which take place
entirely among the Parties to such agreements. The provisions of this Convention shall
not affect transboundary movements which take place pursuant to such agreements
provided that such agreements are compatible with the environmentally sound
management of hazardous wastes and other wastes as required by this Convention.”
As any OECD decision, OECD/LEGAL/0266 is legally binding upon its adherents and is
to be implemented and promulgated through national legislation in each OECD member
(currently 38 members). In the case of the European Union and its member states, the OECD
Decision is implemented through the waste shipments Regulation (EC) No. 1013/2006.1

50 OECD Decision OECD/LEGAL/0266 on transboundary movements of wastes
In Canada, the Cross-border Movement of Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Recyclable
Material Regulations2 fully implement the requirements of the OECD Decision, the Basel
Convention, together with the Canada-US Arrangement on non-hazardous waste and scrap.
Other OECD Members have enacted similar national legislation.
Export controls under the OECD Decision
The OECD Decision applies only to transboundary movements of wastes which are destined
for recovery operations within the national jurisdiction of any OECD member. The OECD
Decision includes two categories of control procedures for wastes destined for recovery
in another OECD member: the Green control procedure and the Amber control procedure
(see Figure 1).
Green control procedure
Wastes falling under the Green control procedure are listed in Appendix 3 to the OECD
Decision. These wastes do not typically exhibit hazardous characteristics and are deemed
to pose negligible risks for human health and the environment during their transboundary
movement for recovery within the national jurisdiction of any OECD member. Appendix 3 is
divided into two parts:
• Part I includes the wastes listed in Annex IX to the Basel Convention
(i.e. wastes not characterized as hazardous in accordance with Article 1(1)(a)
of the Convention). However, some adjustments have been made in respect of
certain entries of Annex IX for the purposes of the OECD Decision.
• Part II contains additional wastes subject to the Green control procedure which,
according to a number of risk criteria (see Appendix 6 to the OECD Decision),
are assessed as wastes that do not pose any risk for human health and the
environment when destined for recovery within the national jurisdiction of any
OECD member. These entries are not listed under the Basel Convention.
Since the wastes subject to the Green control procedure are deemed to pose negligible
risks for human health and the environment during their transboundary movement for
recovery within the national jurisdiction of any OECD member, they are not controlled under
the OECD Decision. However, the OECD Decision imposes a general requirement that
all wastes, including those subject to the Green control procedure, shall be destined for
recovery operations within a recovery facility which will recover them in an environmentally
sound manner according to national laws, regulations and practices.
It should also be noted that some OECD members may impose specific requirements for the
transboundary movements of wastes subject to the Green control procedure by their domestic
legislation. For example, the waste shipments Regulation (EC) No. 1013/2006 requires that
certain information, signed by the holder of wastes subject to the Green control procedure,
accompany each shipment of such waste in order to assist the tracking of these shipments.

International export regulations and controls 51
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Figure 1: Identification of wastes subject to the OECD Decision
Is the material waste?
Yes
MOVEMENT SUBJECT TO
Is the waste destined THE GREEN CONTROL
for recovery from an PROCEDURE
OECD member to another
OECD member? No
Yes Is the waste contaminated to an
extent which increases the risk
Is the waste listed in when taking into account the
Yes
Appendix 3? criteria in Appendix 6 or which
prevents environmentally
sound recovery?
No
Is the waste listed in Yes
No No
Appendix 4?
Yes MOVEMENT SUBJECT TO
THE AMBER CONTROL
PROCEDURE
No
Does the waste exhibit a
Yes
hazardous characteristic?
No
MOVEMENT NOT SUBJECT
TO THE OECD DECISION
Domestic control, if applicable
Bilateral agreements, if applicable
Basel control, if applicable
EU control, if applicable
NO WASTE CONTROL

52 OECD Decision OECD/LEGAL/0266 on transboundary movements of wastes
Amber control procedure
Wastes falling under the Amber control procedure are listed in Appendix 4 to the OECD
Decision. These wastes usually, but not always, exhibit one or more hazardous characteristics.
Due to their hazardousness or other reason referred to in Appendix 6 to the OECD Decision,
they may pose a risk for human health and the environment during their transboundary
movement for recovery within the national jurisdiction of any OECD member and are
therefore subject to specific control procedures under the OECD Decision. Appendix 4 is
divided into two Parts:
• Part I includes the wastes listed in Annex II (wastes requiring special
consideration, i.e. wastes collected from households, residues arising from
the incineration of household wastes and certain plastic waste) and Annex VIII
(wastes characterized as hazardous) to the Basel Convention. Some adjustments
have been made in respect to certain entries of Annex VIII for the purposes of
the OECD Decision.
• Part II contains additional wastes subject to the Amber control procedure, which,
according to a number of risk criteria (see Appendix 6 to the OECD Decision) are
assessed to pose a risk for human health and the environment when destined for
recovery within the national jurisdiction of any OECD member. These entries are
not listed under the Basel Convention.
Notification procedure
Within the national jurisdiction of OECD members, all transboundary movements of waste
subject to the Amber control procedure can take place only upon prior written notification to
the competent authorities of countries of export, import and transit (if any) and upon tacit or
written consent from these authorities to the notified movement of waste.
Once a competent authority of the OECD member of import receives a notification, it shall
acknowledge the receipt within three working days. The competent authorities concerned
(i.e. of import, export and transit OECD member) then have 30 days, following the issuance
of the acknowledgement, to object to the movement or to issue a written consent to it.
If no objection by any of the competent authorities concerned is lodged within 30 days, the
movement may commence under a tacit consent.
In order to simplify and accelerate the notification procedures, competent authorities of
OECD members have the possibility to designate “pre-consented recovery facilities” for
which they do not raise objections concerning regular transboundary movements of certain
waste types. Transboundary shipments to pre-consented facilities benefit from an accelerated
procedure. Normally,3 only a seven-working day consideration period following the issuance
of the acknowledgement is allowed for competent authorities.

International export regulations and controls 53
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Members have the obligation to inform the OECD Secretariat of any pre-consent they grant
to their recovery facility. This information is made available updated regularly in the OECD
Database on Transboundary Movements of Waste.4 Currently, the database lists around 460
pre-consented recovery facilities from 23 OECD members.
Tracking Procedure
Once all consents have been obtained from the competent authorities concerned, the
shipment of waste may proceed in accordance with the consents and the terms of the contract.
Furthermore, each shipment of waste shall be accompanied by a movement document from
the point at which the transboundary movement begins to the point of recovery.
The movement document is the core element of the tracking procedure. It provides all
the relevant information on a particular consignment of waste and shall accompany the
consignment from the time it is no longer in the care of the exporter to the time it arrives at
the recovery facility and is recovered. The movement document facilitates the identification of
the waste as well as of the responsible parties and competent authorities to be contacted at
any time, for example at the border control or other control points along transport routes, or
in case of accident or other incident during the transport of the waste. It is also an important
tool for competent authorities to follow-up the different stages of the waste shipment and to
ensure that it is carried out in accordance with the information given in the notification and
possible conditions set out in their consents.
Appendix 8 to the OECD Decision provides a template for the movement document as well
as guidance on how to fill the template. The movement document must be completed and
signed by the exporter at the start of the shipment, each carrier or carrier’s representative
when taking possession of the waste as well as the recovery facility upon receipt of the
waste and then recovery of the waste concerned. The recovery facility sends completed and
signed copies of the movement document to the exporter and the competent authorities
concerned, both upon receipt and then recovery of the waste. In addition, if required by
domestic legislation, the customs offices of the countries of export, import or transit may use
the movement document to certify the passage through the customs offices of entry and exit.
Some considerations in relation to
WTO agreements
The OECD Decision is a legally binding international instrument to establish controls for
import and export of wastes which may pose a risk or a hazard to human health and the
environment.5 It provides for facilitated trade of waste destined for recovery within the
OECD membership. The basic assumption thereby is that environmental standards, as
well as capacities among OECD members, are all fulfilling minimum standards and are
environmentally sound.

54 OECD Decision OECD/LEGAL/0266 on transboundary movements of wastes
The OECD deems that the Decision is aligned with basic WTO principles as follows:
• Without discrimination: Equal controls apply to all trading partners within
the OECD membership. Members may control certain wastes differently in
conformity with domestic legislation and the rules of international law, in order
to protect human health and the environment. However, these “specific national
controls” should be on an exceptional basis and temporary in nature.
• Freer: The OECD Control System provides for facilitated trade of wastes destined
for recovery operations, shortening the consideration period and establishing
tacit consent, compared to trade rules established by the Basel Convention.
• Predictable: Full transparency of trade rules is enshrined into the OECD
Decision. Any specific national controls, as well as any pre-consents to recovery
facilities should be reported to the OECD Secretariat. This information is made
available on the OECD website.
• More competitive: Through the notification procedure, the OECD Decision
ensures that transboundary movements of hazardous waste are only taking place
with the consent of export, import and, if any, transit countries, discouraging
“unfair” practices.
• More beneficial for less developed countries: The OECD Decision only
applies to OECD members. The specific national control provision allows for
less-developed OECD members to apply stricter controls for transboundary
movements of wastes if this is deemed necessary. These specific national
controls should be on exceptional basis and temporary in nature, whilst the
country works towards alignment. For instance, Colombia recently became an
OECD member. It became an adherent to the OECD Decision with a specific
timeframe for implementation and is currently not participating in the OECD
Decision’s control system.
Recent developments
Modification of controls for transboundary movements of
plastic waste (since 1 January 2021)
At the 14th meeting of the Conference of the Parties (CoP) to the Basel Convention in May
2019, the CoP adopted amendments to Annex II (wastes requiring special consideration),
Annex VIII (wastes characterized as hazardous) and Annex IX (wastes not characterized
as hazardous, and hence outside the scope) to the Basel Convention, impacting the
transboundary movement of plastic wastes. Normally, amendments to the annexes of the
Basel Convention are automatically incorporated into the appendices of the OECD Decision
unless an objection is made by an OECD member. On 3 July 2019, the OECD Secretariat
received an objection to the automatic incorporation, which led to a series of meetings on
how to control the wastes in questions under the OECD Decision.

International export regulations and controls 55
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Since 1 January, hazardous plastic wastes, namely those covered by new Basel entry A3210,
are listed under Appendix 4 and subject to the Amber control procedure. For other plastic
wastes, namely those covered by new Basel entries B3011 and Y48, each OECD member
retains its right to control the plastic waste in question in conformity with its domestic
legislation and international law, as no consensus was reached on the controls to be applied
within the OECD Control System.6
Ongoing negotiations on controls for transboundary movements
of e-waste
The 15th meeting of the Basel CoP in June 2022 adopted additional amendments to
their waste lists, further restricting transboundary movements of electrical and electronic
waste (e-waste). On 16 August 2022, the OECD Secretariat received an objection to the
automatic incorporation of these e-waste amendments into the OECD Decision. A process is
currently underway to work towards an alternative proposal on how to control transboundary
movements of e-waste under the OECD Decision. This process is to be completed before
the Basel amendments become effective on 1 January 2025.
Endnotes
1 Regulation (EC) No. 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006
on shipments of waste, 12 July 2006.
2 Cross-border Movement of Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Recyclable Material Regulations,
SOR/2021-25, 26 February 2021.
3 This consideration period may be extended to 30 days on request by the competent authority of the
OECD member of export.
4 See https://www.oecd.org/environment/waste/theoecdcontrolsystemforwasterecovery.htm.
5 See OECD (2009) for further information.
6 For information about these national controls lists, see https://www.oecd.org/env/waste/22-02-07-
Reporting-of-controls.pdf.

56 Vienna Convention and Montreal Protocol on protecting the ozone layer
Vienna Convention for the Protection
of the Ozone Layer and Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete
the Ozone Layer
The Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer are major
milestones in international environmental law, striving together to protect the
environment from any harmful effects of the ozone layer depletion through
control, reduction and ultimately elimination of production and consumption
of ozone-depleting substances (ODSs). The Montreal Protocol contains
detailed provisions on reporting on control and production of ODSs –
the trade of which is through mandatory export and import licensing
procedures. This chapter provides an overview of the Vienna Convention and
the Montreal Protocol, discussing key institutions under each and provisions
that affect trade in ODSs.
Prepared by the WTO Secretariat and reviewed by Gilbert M. Bankobeza (former Chief of
Legal Affairs and Compliance, Ozone Secretariat, United Nations Environment Programme).

International export regulations and controls 57
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Background
The Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (Vienna Convention) serves
as a framework treaty for legal and practical action to protect the planet’s ozone layer.
Under the Vienna Convention, its parties aim to promote cooperation by means of systematic
observations, research and information exchange on the effects of human activities on the
ozone layer and to adopt legislative or administrative measures against activities likely to
have adverse effects on the ozone layer.1 The Vienna Convention is an important part of the
international ozone regime, providing the forum for discussions on scientific research and
observations of the ozone layer. It was adopted on 22 March 1985 and entered into force on
22 September 1988.
Parties to the Vienna Convention may adopt other treaties and protocols. On 16 September
1987, the contracting parties adopted the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete
the Ozone Layer (Montreal Protocol), which entered into force on 1 January 1989. In 2009,
it achieved universal ratification together with the Vienna Convention. It is the only protocol
to the Vienna Convention, and its objective is to protect human health and the environment
against adverse effects resulting or likely to result from human activities which modify or are
likely to modify the ozone layer. The Montreal Protocol has been amended on five occasions,
the last of which was the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, agreed on 15 October
2016 and entering into force on 1 January 2019, following ratification by 65 parties.
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the
Ozone Layer
Overview
The overall objective of the Vienna Convention is to protect human health and the environment
against the effects of ozone depletion. As a framework convention, it does not establish
any specific controls on ozone-depleting substances (ODSs). Instead, it establishes a
general obligation upon the parties to protect the ozone layer and emphasizes the need
for international cooperation.2 The Vienna Convention requires parties to take “appropriate
measures … against adverse effects resulting or likely to result from human activities which
modify or are likely to modify the ozone layer.” These measures include:
• adoption of legislative and administrative measures;
• cooperation on research and scientific assessment;
• exchange of information;
• development and transfer of technology.

58 Vienna Convention and Montreal Protocol on protecting the ozone layer
Key institutions
The Vienna Convention provided for the creation of the Conference of the Parties (CoP),
initially meeting once every three years but now once every two years, the Ozone Secretariat,
Ozone Research Managers (ORM) and the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties (Bureau).
The CoP was established to bring together all contracting parties to the Vienna Convention.
Article 6 of the Vienna Convention lists some specific functions of the CoP, which include:
• reviewing scientific information;
• promoting the harmonization of appropriate policies, strategies and measures;
• deciding on reporting procedures;
• adopting programmes for research and systematic observations;
• considering and adopting protocols and amendments;
• establishing subsidiary bodies.
The CoP also has a general and more open-ended mandate to undertake any additional
action required to achieve the purposes of the Vienna Convention.
The Ozone Secretariat is the administrative office for the Vienna Convention and the Montreal
Protocol. It organizes the conferences and meetings for the parties to the Vienna Convention
and the Montreal Protocol, manages the implementation of decisions resulting from these
conferences and meetings, and provides governments, organizations and individuals with
information on how they can protect the ozone layer.
The ORM is a subsidiary body established in response to Article 3 of the Vienna Convention
concerning research and systematic observations. The ORM comprises government research
managers dealing with atmospheric research and monitoring as well as research on health
and environmental effects of ozone modifications. The main purpose of the meetings of the
ORM is to ensure proper coordination of activities relating to ozone research and monitoring,
and to identify gaps that need to be addressed.
The Bureau’s core function is to facilitate, on behalf of the parties, the review of scientific
information on the ozone layer, on its possible modification and on possible effects of any such
modifications. The Bureau is also mandated to consider programmes for research, systematic
observations, scientific and technological cooperation, the exchange of information and the
transfer of technology and knowledge.
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the
Ozone Layer
During the negotiations, states agreed that the Vienna Convention itself would provide a
framework of general obligations, conducting research and systematic observations and
cooperation in the legal, scientific and technical fields. They also agreed that states would

International export regulations and controls 59
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
reconvene within two years to negotiate a separate protocol3 with set timelines and targets
for phasing out ODSs.
During the negotiations of the Montreal Protocol, three issues were of major importance:
(a) Broad adherence to the Montreal Protocol, including by developing countries.
There was considerable concern about the financial abilities of developing countries to
implement the Montreal Protocol.
(b) The Montreal Protocol needed to be drafted in a flexible way to adjust, in a timely
manner, to new scientific evidence and to the changing needs of its parties.
(c) Setting an economically feasible and detailed time schedule for the phasing out
of ODSs.
Overview
The Montreal Protocol requires parties to take measures to reduce global emissions of ODSs
with the ultimate objective of their elimination. This is done through the adoption of control
measures for the phasing out of the consumption and production of ODSs. The Montreal
Protocol also includes control measures for the phasing down of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
which do not deplete the ozone layer, but which have a high global-warming potential4 and
are often used as substitutes for ODSs.
The Montreal Protocol establishes concrete and measurable legally binding obligations
for parties’ control on production and consumption of ODSs and HFCs. In its original form,
the Montreal Protocol required developed countries to begin phasing out chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs) and halons in 1989 and set deadlines for achieving specific reductions. The controls
in the Montreal Protocol have been made progressively more comprehensive, effective and
ambitious through a series of amendments to add more substances and other measures and
adjustments to tighten the control measures.
Special provisions for developing countries
The Montreal Protocol recognizes that developing countries contributed to ozone depletion
to a lesser extent than industrialized countries. Special provisions include a grace period for
developing countries in phasing out or down the production and consumption of controlled
substances (e.g. ten-year delay in phasing out hydrochlorofluorocarbons and a five-year later
start in phasing down HFCs). This grace period is granted under Article 5 of the Montreal
Protocol, which applies to developing countries whose annual calculated per capita level
of consumption of Annex A controlled substances (CFCs and halons) was below a set
threshold of 0.3 kg per capita on the date of the entry into force of the Montreal Protocol or
any time thereafter until 1 January 1999. As a result of these provisions, discussions under
the Montreal Protocol will often refer to “Article 5 parties” and to “non-Article 5 parties” to
differentiate between developing and industrialized countries.

60 Vienna Convention and Montreal Protocol on protecting the ozone layer
The adoption and implementation of the Montreal Protocol has been a significant milestone in
international environmental law. It established stepwise schedules for reducing and eventually
eliminating the consumption and production of a range of ODSs and recently also HFCs.
These substances are listed in Annexes A, B, C, E and F to the Montreal Protocol and are to
be phased out/down within the schedules provided in Articles 2A-2J. The Montreal Protocol
controls both consumption and production of ODS and HFCs to protect the interests of
producers and importers, who otherwise would have had to sustain high price inflation or
engage in overproduction during the phase-out period of the targeted substances.
Key institutions
The Meeting of the Parties (MoP) is the organ that makes decisions such as those relating to
the adoption of amendments to the Montreal Protocol, making adjustments to schedules for
phasing out or down controlled substances and adding or removing substances listed under
the annexes to the Protocol. The MoP considers and makes decisions on any additional
action that may be required for the implementation of the Montreal Protocol.
The Bureau of the MoP reviews the work of any working groups established by the parties
during their meetings and considers topics on the agenda for the next MoP. The first MoP
established the Open-ended Working Group, and it comprises all parties, meets annually,
and is tasked with preparing for, and supporting the MoP, notably by reviewing reports by the
assessment panels.
In addition to the Ozone Secretariat mentioned above, other institutions include the
Multilateral Fund, the assessment panels and the Implementation Committee. The Multilateral
Fund, established by Decision II/8 of the Second MoP, in June 1990,5 promotes technology
transfer and provides financial assistance to Article 5 parties to meet their obligations under
the Montreal Protocol.
In accordance with Article 6 of the Montreal Protocol, three assessment panels provide
independent scientific information to the parties regarding ozone depletion, its environmental
effects, and the status of alternative substances and technologies and their economic
implications. The three panels are the Scientific Assessment Panel, the Technology and
Economic Assessment Panel and the Environmental Effects Assessment Panel.
The Implementation Committee considers information and observations submitted to it with
a view to securing an amicable solution to issues that are subject to non-compliance by
any party or groups of parties. The non-compliance procedure was adopted by the parties
under Article 8 of the Montreal Protocol to bring non-complying parties into compliance by
engaging them in a cooperative manner. The non-compliance process can be invoked by any
party to the Montreal Protocol, by the Ozone Secretariat or by the party itself.

International export regulations and controls 61
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Reporting on consumption and production
Under Article 7, each party reports annual statistical data on production, import and export of
each of the substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol. All parties are obliged to report
this national data for ODS, and for the parties that have ratified the Kigali Amendment to the
Montreal Protocol have also to report national data for HFCs. Under Article 7(3), each party
is to provide to the Ozone Secretariat statistical data on its annual production of each of the
controlled substances listed in the relevant annexes and, separately, for each substance.
The information must include information such as the amounts used for feedstocks, amounts
destroyed by technologies approved by the parties, and imports from and exports to parties
and non-parties, respectively.
The data on consumption and production are reported to the Ozone Secretariat and is
available in an aggregated format on the ozone data centre.6 The reporting obligations have
been incorporated into a standard data reporting format, commonly called Article 7 data
reporting forms.7 Parties report their data through the online portal and have a variety of tools
to assist them in the process.8
Trade control through mandatory export and import
licensing procedures
Parties have an obligation, under Article 4B of the Montreal Protocol, to establish and
implement a system for licensing the import and export of new, used, recycled and reclaimed
controlled substances. Each party, within three months of the date of introducing its licensing
system, also should report to the Ozone Secretariat the information on the establishment and
operation of that system. Information regarding national focal points for licensing systems is
available from the Ozone Secretariat.9
If the Montreal Protocol is amended and new substances are listed in the annexes, a timetable
of three months is set for parties to establish licensing systems after ratifying the amendment.
For example, the Kigali Amendment requires each party, by 1 January 2019, or within three
months of the date of entry into force of that paragraph for the party, whichever is later, to
establish and implement licensing systems for HFCs. Article 5 parties could delay taking
those actions until 1 January 2021.
Certain decisions of the MoP also deal with illegal trade and production of ODSs. Paragraph 7
of Decision XIV/7 adopted at the 14th MoP, invited parties to report to the Ozone Secretariat
fully proved cases of illegal trade in ODSs in order to facilitate an exchange of information.10
Paragraph 5(d) of Decision XXXI/3 adopted at the 31st MoP, further encouraged parties
to take action to identify and prevent illegal production, import, export and consumption of
controlled substances and to report to the Ozone Secretariat on the cause of significant
cases and actions taken to address them, to facilitate an exchange of information.11
More information on the reported cases if illicit trade is available on the United Nations
Environment Programme website.12

62 Vienna Convention and Montreal Protocol on protecting the ozone layer
Dealing with non-parties
The Montreal Protocol addresses the problem of trade with states that are not yet parties to
the treaty (non-parties). These provisions are set out under Article 4 of the Montreal Protocol,
which sets deadlines beyond which trade with non-parties in the controlled substances is
banned unless the MoP find them to be in compliance with the Protocol. Since the Montreal
Protocol achieved universal ratification in 2009, and the first four amendments to the Protocol
achieved universal ratification in 2014, provisions regarding trade with non-parties were
less relevant for a period. However, the Kigali Amendment, agreed in 2016, has renewed
the significance of these provisions under the Protocol. To date, 50 parties to the Montreal
Protocol have not yet ratified the Kigali Amendment.

International export regulations and controls 63
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Endnotes
1 See Article 2 of the Vienna Convention.
2 Ibid.
3 A protocol is a treaty negotiated under the umbrella of an existing convention. It constitutes a separate
and additional agreement, and which must be signed and ratified by the parties to the convention
concerned. Protocols typically strengthen a convention by adding new, more detailed commitments.
4 Global warming potential is a measure of the relative global warming effects of different gases. Further
information is available at https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/28246/7789G-
WPRef_EN.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y - :~:text=Global%20warming%20potential%20(GWP)%20
is,a%20specific%20period%20of%20time.
5 Decision II/8: Financial mechanism, Second Meeting of the Parties, June 1990.
6 Available at https://ozone.unep.org/countries/data.
7 See https://www.ozonactionmeetings.org/system/files/10.4_background_a7_data_reporting_final_1.pdf.
8 Available at https://ozone.unep.org/countries/data-reporting-tools.
9 See https://ozone.unep.org/countries/additional-reported-information/focal-points-licensing-systems.
10 Decision XIV/7: Monitoring of trade in ozone-depleting substances and preventing illegal trade in
ozone-depleting substances, Fourteenth Meeting of the Parties, November 2002.
11 Decision XXXI/3: Unexpected emissions of CFC 11 and institutional processes to be enhanced to
strengthen the effective implementation and enforcement of the Montreal Protocol, Thirty-first Meeting of
the Parties, November 2019.
12 See https://ozone.unep.org/countries/additional-reported-information/illegal-trade.

2
Drugs control
International Drug Control Conventions 66
(1961, 1971 and 1988 Conventions)
International Narcotics Control Board
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco 78
Control and Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade
in Tobacco Products
Secretariat of the WHO Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control

66 International Drug Control Conventions
International Drug Control Conventions
(1961, 1971 and 1988 Conventions)
The three conventions under the United Nations form the current normative
framework for control of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and
precursor chemicals: Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,
as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961; the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971; and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988. They are collectively referred
to as the International Drug Control Conventions (UNODC, 2013).
These conventions facilitate cross-border movement of internationally
controlled substances for medical, scientific and industrial use, while
ensuring no diversion of these substances to illicit channels. This chapter
provides an overview of key provisions of the conventions, such as those
relating to the establishment of estimates and assessments for the production
and trade of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, as well export
and import authorization requirements for trade in these substances and
their precursors. Additionally, this chapter outlines the operational support,
including online pre-export notification system and authorization systems
that is provided through the International Narcotics Control Board to the
states parties to the conventions.
Prepared by the the International Narcotics Control Board.

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 67
Background
The right to health is one of a set of internationally agreed human rights, is inseparable
from these other rights and is the overarching objective of the International Drug Control
Conventions, which are aimed at safeguarding the health and welfare of humankind. Most
recently, Sustainable Development Goal 3 (Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for
all at all ages) calls for a global partnership to ensure that medicines reach those who need
them. These medicines include narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances that, while having
essential uses in medicine, also pose a high risk of harm, including dependency and health
deterioration. Recognizing this, the international community has set up a system of control
that aims to facilitate international trade in these substances, while at the same ensuring that
such trade is authorized exclusively for medical and scientific ends, and preventing diversion
to illicit channels and misuse.
The current international drug control framework has its roots in the International Opium
Commission, which met in 1909 in Shanghai and led to the adoption of the International
Opium Convention, signed at The Hague in 1912, the first international drug control treaty,
laying down initial principles of narcotics control as part of international law. In line with this
first initiative, two instruments followed to form the first body of drug control legislation:
the International Convention relating to Dangerous Drugs, in 1925, and the Convention for
the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs, in 1936.
The Second World War and the subsequent dissolution of the League of Nations in 1946
profoundly disrupted the international legal framework of drug control and forced an overhaul
of the normative system. It was in the context of this reform that the United Nations adopted
a new international drug control treaty, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, to
recast and replace all pre-existing instruments related to narcotics control. This convention
was followed by the adoption of two other legal instruments – the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971 (1971 Convention) and the United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 (1988 Convention),
thus forming the current normative framework for control of narcotic drugs, psychotropic
substances and precursor chemicals (i.e. substances used in the illicit manufacture of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances). In addition, the Convention of 1961 was
further expanded in 1972 by an amending protocol to become the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 (1961 Convention). Today, all three conventions have been widely
ratified by individual states. There are 186 states parties to the 1961 Convention, 184 to the
1971 Convention and 191 to the 1988 Convention, representing almost universal adherence
to the current drug control framework.
In addition to introducing a comprehensive normative framework for international drug control,
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 established the International Narcotics
Control Board (INCB) in 1968. The INCB is the independent, quasi-judicial control and treaty
monitoring body for the implementation of international drug control treaties. In accordance

68 International Drug Control Conventions
with its functions and mandate, the INCB closely monitors international trade in controlled
substances to ensure that sufficient quantities of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances
and precursor chemicals are available for medical, scientific and industrial uses, and that
there is no diversion from licit sources to illicit traffic. The objective of the conventions is
not to hinder international trade in controlled substances, but to provide a framework to
ensure they are traded for licit purposes only and that the risks for misuse or diversion of
these substances are minimized. To this end, the INCB administers a system of estimates for
narcotic drugs, a voluntary assessment system for psychotropic substances and monitors
their licit activities through a statistical returns system.
As regards precursor chemicals that can be used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances, the INCB supports governments in monitoring their
international trade through a system of pre-export notifications and estimated annual legitimate
requirements. These mechanisms facilitate investigations into suspicious transactions and
seized consignments. The reports received through these mechanisms enables the INCB to
support governments in identifying weaknesses in national and international control systems
and contributes to rectifying such situations.
As of the end of January 2023, 141 narcotic drugs were listed under the 1961 Convention1,
167 psychotropic substances under the 1971 Convention2, and 33 precursor chemicals
under the 1988 Convention3. Additional substances can be included in or deleted from the
list of internationally controlled narcotics drugs and psychotropics substances, following a
decision of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND), based on a request of the same by a
party to the 1961 Convention, 1971 Convention, or the World Health Organization (WHO).
With regard to precursors, changes to the list of controlled precursor chemicals shall follow
a decision of the CND based on a request of the same by a party to the 1988 Convention
or the INCB.
Scope
All three conventions, together with the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and the CND4, require states parties to participate
in the control of international trade of internationally controlled substances. With regard
to narcotic drugs governed by the 1961 Convention, control may include the limitation of
export and import of narcotic drugs to the estimated requirements of the importing country,
the control and supervision of ports and free zones, the prohibition of certain transactions5,
and the detention of consignments without accompanying documents. Another important
provision is the licence regime for the authorization of the export and import of narcotic drugs.
Under this regime, each country must have a competent authority to issue authorizations for
the export and import of narcotic drugs.
Somewhat similar provisions exist for psychotropic substances under the 1971 Convention,
with varying degrees of control applied to different substances, depending on the level
of health risk posed. For example, for psychotropic substances with greatest health risk,

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 69
import and export is allowed only if both the importer and exporter are national competent
authorities, or persons or companies specifically authorized by the competent authorities
of their respective countries to trade in these substances. Export controls for psychotropic
substances with less health risk, on the other hand, would be less stringent, as the exporting
country may simply send a notification of the export to the authorities of the importing country.
Finally, neither prior authorization nor export declaration is required for those substances that
pose the least risk to health.
Finally, the 1988 Convention contains further provisions for the control of international
trade in precursor chemicals that can be used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances. In particular, the 1988 Convention requires states parties
to establish and maintain a system to monitor international trade in precursor chemicals in
order to facilitate the identification of suspicious transactions involving these substances.
Pursuant to the 1988 Convention, the monitoring of international trade in precursors should be
conducted in close cooperation with the public and private sectors, including manufacturers,
importers, exporters, wholesalers and retailers, who shall inform the competent authorities
of suspicious orders and transactions. The states parties are required to notify each other
about any reasons to believe that the import, export or transit of precursor chemicals is
destined for the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances. In case of
sufficient evidence that precursor chemicals are to be used in the illicit drug manufacture,
the 1988 Convention provides for their seizure.
Export-related measures
1961 and 1971 Conventions
International trade in narcotic drugs occurs within the framework of the system of estimates.6
These estimates are annual quantities of internationally controlled narcotic drugs for medical
or scientific use in a country as determined by its government. Each country and territory
must have estimates in order to manufacture, trade or use narcotic drugs. The INCB reviews,
modifies and approves these estimates prior to their publication.7 This system ensures that
there is no oversupply of narcotic drugs beyond projected demand, thereby reducing the risk
of diversion of these substances.
It is important to note that estimates are not to be regarded as quotas, because the 1961
Convention permits the countries to amend their estimates at any point during the year in
case their legitimate needs for narcotic drugs for medical and scientific purposes change.
The INCB would only seek clarification on the requested amendments to estimates when
the amended estimates significantly differ from the countries’ consumption in the previous
periods, or when no justification is provided for the requested changes.
In addition to estimating its annual amount of narcotic drugs for licit use, a state party is
required to maintain a competent authority to issue export and import authorizations for
narcotic drugs. This authority is also responsible for ensuring that these authorizations

70 International Drug Control Conventions
contain the information as required by the 1961 Convention, their format follow a template
approved by the CND, and that the quantity of a narcotic drug being traded does not exceed
the relevant estimates.
When trading internationally controlled narcotic drugs, copies of import or export
authorizations must be exchanged with the authority of the trading counterpart. The authority
of the exporting country must ensure that a copy of the export authorization is included with
the relevant shipment. Authorities are also responsible for tracking the completion of an
authorized shipment of narcotic drugs by comparing the relevant export confirmation and
import endorsement to ensure no diversion occurred during transit.
The 1971 Convention sets out the import and export controls for psychotropic substances
listed in Schedules I-IV of the Convention.8 Psychotropic substances with the highest health
risk are listed in Schedule I, followed by those with fewer health risks and greater medical
use. Controls for substances included in Schedules I and II are effectively identical as
narcotic drugs under the 1961 Convention, though control measures with regard to the
trading parties are required for substances included in Schedule I of the 1971 Convention.9
Whilst the 1971 Convention requires fewer control measures for substances included in
Schedules III and IV, countries determined that additional trade controls were necessary for
these substances after the adoption of the Convention. Subsequent ECOSOC resolutions
therefore invited governments to extend the control measures for substances in Schedules I
and II of the 1971 Convention to substances in Schedules III and IV.10
Although having similar control measures over the international trade of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, a key difference between the 1961 and 1971 Conventions is the
assessment system for psychotropic substances. Established by ECOSOC resolutions, the
assessment system (annual quantities of internationally controlled psychotropic substances
for medical or scientific use in a country) is voluntary and the assessed quantities of
psychotropic substances do not require approval by the INCB. Instead, they are immediately
published online after being received by the INCB. Countries may update their assessments
at any time, though the INCB recommends such updates are carried out at least once every
three years.
Unique to the 1971 Convention is a provision which allows countries to notify all the states
parties to the Convention that the notifying country is prohibiting the import of a specific
psychotropic substance controlled under the Convention.11 This is another tool for countries to
avert potential diversions of those substances. The article also affords the notifying country the
right to issue exceptional authorizations to import a substance that it would normally prohibit.
Nowadays, for all practical purposes, nearly all governments generally apply the same trade
control measures for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances as the requirements
under both the 1961 and 1971 Conventions are closely aligned. One key difference is that
certain preparations of narcotic drugs, listed in Schedule III, are exempt from international
control, although countries still need to report the legitimate needs of narcotic drugs for
these purposes.

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 71
Figure 1 below illustrates the key steps for importing and exporting countries to undertake for
trade in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances. This is a simplified workflow and does
not necessarily reflect all the requirements of the 1961 and 1971 Conventions nor any legal
requirements included in a country’s own national drug control legislation.
Figure 1: Steps to be taken by national drug control authorities for the import and
export of substances controlled under the 1961 and 1971 Conventions
Importing country Exporting country
Import request for an internationally
controlled narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance
Sufficient estimate/assessment check
Import authorization received
Issue import authorization Confirm importing country has
sufficient estimate or assessment
Export authorization received Issue export authorization
Shipment prepared, contents
Export confirmation received
inventoried then shipment is
dispatched with a copy of the export
authorization
Shipment received, inspected and
contents inventoried Issue export confirmation
Issue import endorsement Import endorsement received*
*Upon completion of the shipment, if the packaging has been tampered with or if the export confirmation and
import endorsement are in disagreement, then authorities from both the importing and exporting countries
should take necessary steps to investigate whether a diversion has occurred.

72 International Drug Control Conventions
1988 Convention
The control measures over trade in, and use of, precursor chemicals are based on provisions
of Article 12 of the 1988 Convention as well as relevant UN resolutions.12 In general,
control measures over precursor chemicals are less stringent than those applied to narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances listed in the 1961 Convention and 1971 Convention,
respectively.
Parties to the 1988 Convention are required to establish and maintain a system to monitor
international trade in precursor chemicals. The monitoring system shall be applied in close
cooperation with manufacturers, importers, exporters, wholesalers and retailers, who should
inform the competent national authorities of suspicious orders and transactions.13 In practice,
the monitoring systems applied nationally take into account the extent, importance and
diversity of the licit use over precursor chemicals in the country in order to facilitate their
legitimate trade, while preventing diversion of these chemicals into illicit channels.
To monitor international trade, most countries apply a system of authorization to the imports
and exports of precursors chemicals. These national systems of authorization may, however,
differ from country to country. The most common national systems of authorization may require
issuance of any of the following authorizations and/or permits by the government authority:
• A general authorization or permit for the imports or exports of precursor chemicals
without any further notifications to the government authority.
• A general authorization to import or export a substance, with an obligation
by the importer or exporter to report exports to the government authority
at least annually.
• A general authorization granted by the competent national authority to a physical
or legal person to import or export a substance, with an obligation by the importer
or exporter to notify the government authority of individual export prior to arrival
or dispatch, respectively. The importer or exporter does not need government
authority’s approval for each import/export.
• An individual export permit is required from the government authority to a physical
or legal person prior to import or export of the substance. The importer or exporter
needs government authority’s approval for each import/export.
A limited number of countries have also banned or prohibited the import or export of
particular precursor chemicals. There are also countries that do not yet control import of
export of all precursor chemicals under international control. A compilation of the systems
of authorization that governments apply to precursors chemicals is regularly shared with all
competent national authorities of the parties to the 1988 Convention.
The 1988 Convention also provides for monitoring of international trade in precursor chemicals
through a system of pre-export notifications. In particular, the exporting countries are obliged
to provide pre-export notifications for shipments of precursor chemicals listed in Table I of the

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 73
Convention, if the importing countries have requested such pre-export notifications pursuant
to Article 12(10)(a) of the 1988 Convention. Pursuant to this requirement, each country from
whose territory a substance in Table I is to be exported shall ensure that, prior to such export,
the competent authorities of the importing country are provided with mandatory information,
in order to verify its legitimacy.
In order to also receive pre-export notifications for substances in Table II of the
1988 Convention, the governments of a number importing countries have requested the
extension of the provisions of Article 12(10)(a) of the 1988 Convention. While the provision
of pre-export notifications for precursors listed in Table II of the 1988 Convention is not
mandatory, most exporting countries provide such notifications for shipments of Table II
substances as well.
Furthermore, with a view to providing exporting countries with an additional tool to monitor
international trade in selected precursors of amphetamine-type stimulants and thus lowering
the risk of their diversion, countries are requested to provide the estimates of their annual
legitimate requirements for certain substances.14 These annual legitimate requirements
provide an indication of the amounts of these substances that the country may need to import
to satisfy its legitimate needs, and are published on the INCB website. They are not to be
regarded as quotas for imports of the precursor chemicals in question and can be changed
by importing countries at any point during the year, if necessary.
Finally, the 1988 Convention provides that imports and exports of precursor chemicals must
be properly labelled and documented.15 Specifically, the commercial and transportation
documents should list the names of precursor chemicals, as stated in Tables I or II of the
1998 Convention, their amounts and provide details of the exporter and importer, and the
consignee if available. The commercial documents used in connection with imports and
exports of precursor chemicals should be maintained for at least two years and be available
for inspection by the competent national authorities.
Trade controls for controlled substances in free
ports and zones
A free port or free zone is typically a designated area within a country in which companies
can import, export and manufacture goods without certain customs restrictions being
implemented, such as reduced or no taxes and tariffs, or reduced control procedures and
documentation. The limited supervision and lack of custom controls that tend to accompany
free ports and free zones, however, may allow traffickers to store and smuggle illicit
substances. In response to this heightened risk of illicit trafficking, the three international
drug conventions require the states parties to exercise the same supervision and control
of internationally controlled substances in free ports and free zones as in other parts of
their territories.16

74 International Drug Control Conventions
Simplified control measures during
emergency situations
While the international trade of controlled substances is regulated by relevant administrative
procedures established by states parties pursuant to treaty obligations as outlined above,
the International Drug Control Conventions also provide scope for the temporary exemption
of some control measures under specific circumstances. For instance, during emergency
situations that require the use of controlled substances for humanitarian assistance, or
when the government of the exporting country is of the view that the export of controlled
substances is essential for the treatment of the sick, in accordance with Article 21 of the
1961 Convention.
A number of internationally controlled substances, including for example morphine, diazepam
and phenobarbital, which are listed by the WHO as essential medicines and often included
in emergency health kits, are vital for pain management, palliative care, surgical care and
anaesthesia, as well as for the treatment of mental health and some neurological conditions.
Other substances, such as fentanyl and midazolam, were also used in many countries to treat
patients with COVID-19 admitted to intensive care units. Ensuring the availability of these
controlled substances during emergency situations is critical to satisfy the sudden and acute
needs of the receiving countries, in particular at the onset of emergencies.
Humanitarian relief agencies have found it difficult to rapidly obtain controlled substances
for medical care in emergency situations, partly because of the additional administrative
requirements for their international movement. It has been reported that some of these
controlled medicines have been removed from emergency health kits in order to minimize
possible delays that their presence might cause to the provision of humanitarian assistance.
The international community has long noted the urgent need for a practical solution to this
obstacle. The Model Guidelines for the International Provision of Controlled Medicines
for Emergency Medical Care (WHO, 1996) represents a concerted effort to expedite the
supply of controlled substances during emergency situations through simplified control
measures. When exporting controlled substances to sites of emergency, governments may
permit such exports without the corresponding import authorizations and/or estimates.
During such circumstances, estimates for the controlled substances can also be submitted
by the exporting country in lieu of the recipient country.
In responding to recent international humanitarian emergencies, for instance the earthquake
in Haiti in 2021 and the port explosion in Beirut in 2020, the INCB has taken active
steps to remind all countries that simplified control procedures are permissible during
these circumstances.17

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 75
Operational support provided to countries on
trade facilitation
Online platforms
International Import and Export Authorization System
When the 1961 and 1971 Conventions entered into force, the only viable way to exchange
import and export authorizations was for national authorities to issue paper documents and
to exchange them via postal or express delivery services. Although that modality remains
valid, states parties to these conventions foresaw the need to modernize this process.
Through several CND resolutions, in particular its resolution 55/618, the CND instructed
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to develop an online platform for the secure
exchange of import and export authorizations between relevant national authorities for the
trade in internationally controlled narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Additionally,
these resolutions also mandated the INCB to administer and promote this online system
among states parties to the 1961 and 1971 Conventions.
As a result of this initiative, the International Import and Export Authorization System (I2ES)
for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances was launched in 2015.19 Designed to be
in conformity with the 1961 and 1971 Conventions, the platform is used by national drug
control authorities to securely issue and exchange electronic import and export authorizations
for substances controlled under the 1961 and 1971 Conventions. The system partially
automates many of the steps illustrated in Figure 1, including automatic checking of available
estimates and assessments, and is available at no cost to countries.
Pre-Export Notification Online
As previously indicated, the 1988 Convention requires states parties to issue pre-export
notifications when exporting a precursor chemical that is included in Table I of the Convention
to those importing countries that have invoked Article 12(10)(a).
In order to allow countries to exchange pre-export information more rapidly and for importing
countries to confirm the legitimacy of the shipment, or to object to proposed shipments in
real time, in case of suspicious transactions, the INCB developed the Pre-Export Notification
(PEN) Online system.20 Launched in 2006, PEN Online allows countries exporting precursor
chemicals to issue and respond to pre-export notifications electronically, in compliance with
the requirements of the 1988 Convention.
With 170 countries registered as of 2023, the INCB expanded the PEN Online system to
allow countries to voluntarily issue pre-export notifications for precursor chemicals beyond

76 International Drug Control Conventions
those under international control. This expansion, known as PEN Online Light, is a tool for
countries to further safeguard international trade by exchanging information on planned
exports of other alternative precursor chemicals that could potentially be exploited for the
illicit manufacture of drugs.21
Import authorization assistance and verification
As previously indicated, states parties must issue import and export authorizations to
permit the trade in internationally controlled narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
Although the format and information in these documents have been standardized by the
relevant conventions as well as the CND, drug control authorities in exporting countries
may have doubts regarding the authenticity of an import authorization. Typically, this occurs
when the exporting authority has not previously received an import authorization from a
country. Additionally, if security features, contact details or other information regarding the
counterpart have changed on the authorization document the exporting authority may wish to
validate these changes prior to issuing an export authorization.
The INCB, through its Secretariat, assists countries which may need help in validating the
authenticity of an import authorization document. The INCB Secretariat maintains a file
containing sample specimens of import authorizations from states and non-states parties
to the drug control conventions for this purpose. If the INCB Secretariat is not able to
immediately confirm the validity of an import authorization presented by the authorities an
export country, then the Secretariat will attempt to either facilitate communication between
the authorities of the two countries or attempt to validate the import authorization with the
issuing authority on behalf of the authorities of exporting country.

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 77
Endnotes
1 See https://www.incb.org/incb/en/narcotic-drugs/Yellowlist/yellow-list.html.
2 See https://www.incb.org/incb/en/psychotropics/green-list.html.
3 See https://www.incb.org/incb/en/precursors/Red_Forms/red-list.html.
4 Established by ECOSOC in 1946, the CND is the central drug policy-making body within the
United Nations System and may make recommendations for the implementation of the International Drug
Control Conventions.
5 These prohibited transactions include exports of consignments to a post office box, or to a bank to the
account of a party other than the party named in the export authorization, and exports of consignments to
a bonded warehouse unless the government of the importing country certifies on the import certificate,
produced by the person or establishment applying for the export authorization, that it has approved the
importation for the purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse.
6 See Article 19 of the 1961 Convention.
7 Subject to the provisions of Article 12 of the 1961 Convention.
8 See Article 12 of the 1971 Convention.
9 See Article 7 of the 1971 Convention for special provisions regarding substances in Schedule I.
10 See resolutions 1985/15 and 1987/30, Improvement of the control of international trade in psychotropic
substances listed in Schedules III and IV of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances,
UN documents E/RES/1985/15 and E/RES/1987/30, 28 May 1985 and 26 May 1987.
11 See Article 13 of the 1971 Convention.
12 Including: resolution 1995/20, Measures to strengthen international cooperation to prevent diversion
of substances listed in table I of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and used in the illicit manufacture of stimulants and
other psychotropic substances, UN document E/RES/1995/20, 24 July 1995; and resolution 49/3,
Strengthening systems for the control of precursor chemicals used in the manufacture of synthetic
drugs, UN document E/2006/28 E/CN.7/2006/10, 17 March 2006.
13 Article 12(9)(a) of the 1988 Convention.
14 These are methylenedioxyphenylacetone (3,4-MDP-2-P), ephedrine, phenylacetone (P-2-P) and
pseudoephedrine, as well as estimated requirements for imports of preparations containing those
substance (see UN document E/2006/28 E/CN.7/2006/10).
15 Article 12(9)(d)-(e) of the 1988 Convention.
16 Outlined in Article 31 of the 1961 Convention, Article 12 of the 1971 Convention and Article 18 of the
1988 Convention.
17 Further guidance on the implementation of these procedures is summarized in Lessons from Countries
and Humanitarian Aid Organizations in Facilitating the Timely Supply of Controlled Substances during
Emergency Situations (INCB, 2021).
18 See resolution 55/6, Developing an international electronic import and export authorization system for
licit trade in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, UN document E/2012/28 E/CN.7/2012/18,
16 March 2012.
19 See https://i2es.incb.org.
20 See https://www.incb.org/documents/PRECURSORS/PEN/PEN_Online_Brochure_v2022.pdf.
21 See https://www.incb.org/documents/PRECURSORS/PEN/PEN_Online_LIGHT_brochure_final.pdf.

78 Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and Protocol to eliminate illicit trade
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control and Protocol to Eliminate Illicit
Trade in Tobacco Products
There are two international treaties currently in force that set out legal
obligations for parties with the overall goal of curbing the tobacco epidemic:
the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) and the
Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (Protocol). The WHO
FCTC provides a framework of comprehensive, multisectoral tobacco control
measures in order to reduce continually and substantially the prevalence of
tobacco use and exposure to tobacco smoke. The Protocol builds on the
WHO FCTC and focuses on the elimination of illicit trade in tobacco products
through supply chain controls and other measures.
Parties’ implementation of measures under the WHO FCTC may have significant
effects on cross-border trade. These include demand reduction measures, such
as price and tax measures, packaging and labelling regulations, and measures
to ban cross-border tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship, as well as
supply reduction provisions such as measures to combat illicit trade in tobacco
products. The Protocol, on the other hand, expressly sets out several measures
that may affect export regulations and controls, including the establishment of a
global tracking and tracing regime for all products manufactured in or imported
into a party, as well as obligations for parties to make the export of tobacco
products subject to a licence or equivalent approval or control system.
WTO members that are parties to the WHO FCTC have used it to justify
quantitative restrictions on import trade. WTO members may also find
reference in future notifications to the WTO that may be made by parties to the
Protocol with respect to import and export of tobacco products and tobacco
manufacturing equipment. This chapter provides a brief introduction to these
two treaties and discusses how implementation by parties of the obligations
they contain could have an impact on certain aspects of cross-border trade in
tobacco products.
Prepared by Evita Ricafort and Sara Hitchman (Secretariat of the WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control).

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 79
Background
Tobacco use and exposure to tobacco smoke kills over 8 million people globally each year.1
The cost of smoking – including related health expenditures and productivity losses –
has been estimated at over US$ 1.4 trillion annually.2 Due to the heavy global toll of the
tobacco epidemic and the need for a concerted response and international cooperation, the
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) was adopted unanimously
in 2003 by the 56th World Health Assembly – the governing body of the World Health
Organization (WHO) – and entered into force in 2005. The WHO FCTC was quickly and
widely embraced.
In recognition that the elimination of all forms of illicit trade in tobacco products is an essential
component of tobacco control, the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products
(Protocol) was adopted in 2012 by the Conference of the Parties (CoP), the governing body
of the WHO FCTC, and entered into force in 2018. As of the time of writing, there are 182
parties to the WHO FCTC. The Protocol has 67 parties. The Meeting of the Parties (MoP) is
the governing body of the Protocol and comprises all parties to the Protocol.
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
The WHO FCTC aims to address the global tobacco epidemic and reaffirms the right of
all people to the highest standard of health. It is the first treaty that was negotiated under
the auspices of the WHO, and as stated in its preamble, was developed in response to
the “concern of the international community about the devastating worldwide health, social,
economic and environmental consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to
tobacco smoke”. The obligations articulated in the WHO FCTC comprise a series of demand
and supply reduction measures, as well as provisions relating to criminal and civil liability
and to scientific and technical cooperation and exchange of information – all of which seek
to address comprehensively the complex factors that facilitate the spread of the tobacco
epidemic globally.
The objective of the WHO FCTC and its Protocol, articulated in Article 3, is to:
“… protect present and future generations from the devastating health, social,
environmental and economic consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure
to tobacco smoke by providing a framework for tobacco control measures to be
implemented by the parties at the national, regional and international levels in order
to reduce continually and substantially the prevalence of tobacco use and exposure
to tobacco smoke.”

80 Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and Protocol to eliminate illicit trade
Article 4 sets out its guiding principles and calls for comprehensive multisectoral
implementation of tobacco control measures, while requiring in its general obligations
(Article 5) that parties protect their public health policies with respect to tobacco control
from commercial and other vested interests of the tobacco industry (defined in Article 1(e) as
“tobacco manufacturers, wholesale distributors and importers of tobacco products”).
Demand reduction provisions
The core demand reduction provisions of the WHO FCTC are found in Articles 6 and 7-14:
• price and tax measures (Article 6);
• non-price measures to reduce demand, such as protection from exposure to
tobacco smoke (Article 8);
• regulation of the contents of tobacco products and tobacco product disclosures
(Articles 9 and 10);
• packaging and labelling of tobacco products (Article 11);
• education, communication, training and public awareness (Article 12);
• bans on tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship (Article 13);
• measures to address tobacco dependence and cessation (Article 14).
Supply reduction provisions
The core supply reduction provisions of the WHO FCTC are found in Articles 15-17:
• commitment of parties to eliminate all forms of illicit trade in tobacco products
(Article 15– expanded upon in the Protocol);
• regulation of sales to and by minors (Article 16);
• provision of economically viable alternatives for tobacco workers and growers
(Article 17).
Other provisions
Other articles seek to protect human health and the environment from the impact of tobacco
cultivation and manufacture (Article 18), to provide for criminal and civil liability to enforce
measures (Article 19), as well as establish mechanisms to promote scientific and technical
cooperation and exchange of information (Articles 20-22).
In addition to the provisions of the WHO FCTC, the parties have adopted guidelines for
implementation of several articles that further elaborate on evidence-based measures to
assist parties in meeting their obligations.3
Some of the obligations contained in the WHO FCTC and the overall determination
of parties “to give priority to their right to protect public health” may have an effect on
cross-border trade. These provisions could include measures related to control of the
supply chain to eliminate illicit trade in tobacco products under Article 15 (including

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 81
licensing to control or regulate the production and distribution of tobacco products).
The implementation of the Convention by a party will involve regulatory measures applicable
to the tobacco industry.
Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products
The Protocol is an international treaty elaborated by the parties to the WHO FCTC further to
Article 15, which aims to eliminate all forms of illicit trade in tobacco products through the
implementation of a package of measures with an emphasis on international cooperation.
The Protocol was developed in response to illicit trade in tobacco products, including both
domestic and cross-border trade, and covering tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco
manufacturing equipment.
Illicit trade in tobacco products is a serious threat to public health because it fuels the
tobacco epidemic by increasing the accessibility and affordability of tobacco products.
Moreover, illicit trade undermines tobacco control policy by reducing the impact of key
tobacco control measures like price and tax increases, thus also causing substantial losses
in government revenues, as well as circumventing labelling and packaging requirements and
other important demand reduction measures. Illicit trade in tobacco products also contributes
to the funding of transnational criminal activities.
Supply chain related provisions in the Protocol
The Protocol seeks to secure the supply chain of tobacco products through a series of
key measures to prevent, deter, detect, investigate and prosecute illicit trade. These include
obligations on the parties to implement a licensing (or equivalent approval) or control system
with regard to the manufacture of tobacco products and manufacturing equipment, as well
as for the import or export of such products and equipment (Article 6), with the addition of
due diligence requirements (Article 7).
A key element of the Protocol is the obligation to establish a global tracking and tracing
regime, comprising national and/or regional tracking and tracing systems for all products
manufactured in or imported into the party, and a global information sharing focal
point enabling parties to make enquiries and receive relevant information (Article 8).
Additional measures to effect supply chain control include:
• obligations with regard to record-keeping (Article 9);
• security and preventive measures (Article 10);
• measures to regulate effectively sales through the Internet (Article 11);
• free zones and international transit (Article 12);
• duty-free sales (Article 13).

82 Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and Protocol to eliminate illicit trade
Other provisions in the Protocol
Additional provisions relate to:
• establishment, investigation and prosecution of offences (Articles 14-19);
• international cooperation, including general and enforcement information sharing
(Articles 20-22);
• assistance and cooperation (Articles 23-29);
• extradition (Articles 30 and 31).
As noted above, several provisions of the Protocol contain obligations on parties to implement
measures with regard to the import and export of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco
manufacturing equipment. The following include key obligations under the Protocol that may
have significant implications on export regulations and controls.
Licence, equivalent approval or control
Article 6 (Licence, equivalent approval or control system) requires parties to make the
manufacture, import and export of tobacco products and manufacturing equipment subject
to a licence or equivalent approval system. Article 6 outlines the measures that parties shall
take with a view to ensuring an effective licensing system, including measures to:
• establish or designate a competent authority to issue, renew, suspend, revoke
and/or cancel licences;
• require that each application for a licence contains requisite information about
the applicant, such as identity, manufacturing locations and capacity, details
of the tobacco products and manufacturing equipment, description of the
intended use and intended market of sale of the tobacco products, and other
relevant information;
• monitor and collect licence fees and consider using them in effective administration
and enforcement of the licensing system or for public health;
• prevent, detect and investigate any irregular or fraudulent practices in the
operation of the licensing system;
• undertake periodic review, renewal, inspection or audit of licences;
• establish a time frame for expiration of licences and subsequent requisite
reapplication; and
• oblige the licensed natural or legal person to inform the competent authority in
advance of any change of location of their business or any significant change, and
of any acquisition or disposal of manufacturing equipment.
Article 6 also indicates that five years after the entry into force of the Protocol, the MoP
(the governing body of the Protocol) will take action to identify any “key inputs” that are
essential to the manufacture of tobacco products and can be subject to an effective control
mechanism, then consider the necessary action.

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 83
Tracking and tracing
Article 8 (Tracking and tracing) requires a global tracking and tracing regime to be established
within five years of entry into force of the Protocol, for purposes of further securing the supply
chain and to assist in the investigation of illicit trade in tobacco products. This regime will
have a “global information sharing focal point” accessible to all parties and enabling them to
make inquiries and receive relevant information.
Parties are obliged to establish national and regional tracking and tracing systems, controlled
by the party for all tobacco products that are manufactured in or imported into its territory
taking into account their own national or regional specific needs and available best practice.
Each party will also have to ensure that all unit packets and packaging and any outside
packaging of cigarettes bear unique, secure and non-removable identification markings,
such as codes or stamps, within five years of the Protocol entering into force for that party;
for other tobacco products, the deadline is ten years from entry into force.
Record-keeping
Article 9 (Record-keeping) obliges parties to require all natural and legal persons engaged
in the supply chain of tobacco, tobacco products and manufacturing equipment to obtain
and store information on all relevant transactions, and which should be made available to the
authorities. These records include shipment date, shipping routes and destination, mode of
transportation, intended market of retail sale or use, and other relevant information.
Unlawful conduct
Article 14 (Unlawful conduct including criminal offences) details what conduct should be
considered unlawful subject to the principles of the domestic law of each party. Parties have
discretion in deciding which of the unlawful conduct would constitute a criminal offence and
shall notify the Secretariat which of the unlawful conduct that party has determined to be a
criminal offence. Such conduct includes:
• exporting tobacco, tobacco products or manufacturing equipment without
paying the applicable duties, taxes and other levies or without bearing applicable
fiscal stamps and unique identification markings, or attempts to smuggle such
products;
• exporting illicitly manufactured tobacco, illicit tobacco products, products
bearing false fiscal stamps and/or other required markings or labels, or illicit
manufacturing equipment;
• failing to keep records required in the Protocol or maintaining false records.

84 Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and Protocol to eliminate illicit trade
Information sharing
Article 20 (General information sharing) requires parties to report on matters relevant
for purposes of achieving the objectives of the Protocol, including details of seizures of
tobacco products and taxes evaded, and exports of tobacco, tobacco products or
manufacturing equipment.
Article 21 (Enforcement information sharing) requires parties to exchange information such
as records of licensing, investigations and prosecutions, and records of payment for export
of tobacco, tobacco, products or manufacturing equipment, on their own initiative or on the
request of a party that provides due justification that such information is necessary for the
detection or investigation of illicit trade.
Considerations in relation to WTO agreements
WTO members that are parties to the WHO FCTC have used it to justify quantitative
restrictions on the import and export of tobacco products. To date, four notifications4 to the
WTO have used the WHO FCTC as a justification for quantitative restrictions on import
trade. None has listed the WHO FCTC as a justification for quantitative restrictions on export
trade flows. Justifications for restrictions with regard to tobacco or tobacco products have
focused instead on GATT 1994 Article XX(b), which refers to the protection of human life or
health, in addition to existing national legislation.
On the other hand, the Protocol envisions control of the tobacco product supply chain to
eliminate illicit trade in tobacco products and covers the import and export of tobacco products
and manufacturing equipment specifically. Hence, it may find reference in notifications to the
WTO in the future with regard to the import and export of tobacco products and tobacco
manufacturing equipment.

DRUGS
CONTROL
International export regulations and controls 85
Endnotes
1 See https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tobacco.
2 Goodchild et al. (2018).
3 Available at https://fctc.who.int/who-fctc/overview/treaty-instruments.
4 See: Notification pursuant to the Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions,
WTO documents G/MA/QR/N/MYS/1, 6 October 2020; G/MA/QR/N/MUS/4, 14 September 2018;
G/MA/QR/N/MUS/5, 24 September 2020; and G/MA/QR/N/MUS/6, 5 October 2022.

3
Weapons and
disarmament
United Nations Security Council resolutions 88
and export controls
Convention on the Prohibition of the 94
Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and their Destruction
Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Arms Trade Treaty 104
Arms Trade Treaty Secretariat
Australia Group 114
Australia Group Secretariat
Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls 122
for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods
and Technologies
Wassenaar Arrangement Secretariat

88 United Nations Security Council resolutions and export controls
United Nations Security Council
resolutions and export controls
In discharging its primary responsibility of maintenance of international
peace and security, the United Nations Security Council has adopted
several resolutions pertaining to weapons control and other measures,
which may have an effect on trade in certain products, especially when
the resolutions seek to control the proliferation and transfer of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons. While some of these resolutions
are of general application, others are specific to certain UN members.
Security Council resolution 1540, which was adopted in 2004, is a key
instrument that affirms that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery constitutes a threat to international
peace and security and established a framework that obliges all states,
inter alia, to refrain from supporting by any means non-state actors from
developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring
or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of
delivery. This chapter delves into this resolution, discussing the obligations
UN members have undertaken and the institutional mechanisms established
thereunder, with an emphasis on export controls.
Prepared by the WTO Secretariat and reviewed by the Security Council Affairs Division
(Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, United Nations).

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 89
Background
The Security Council is one of the primary organs of the United Nations. The Charter of
the United Nations confers the Security Council with the “primary responsibility [of] the
maintenance of international peace and security”.1 It has fifteen members, including the five
permanent members (China, France, Russian Federation, United Kingdom, United States)
and ten non-permanent members elected by the General Assembly2, with each member
having one vote.3 Under the UN Charter, all UN members are obligated to comply with
decisions of the Security Council.4
Resolutions adopted by the Security Council are binding on all UN members. Security
Council resolutions are formal expressions of the opinion or will of UN organs. It is an official
document accepted by fifteen members of the Security Council and is adopted by a vote
of its members. The resolution is adopted if nine or more of the fifteen members vote for
the resolution, “including the concurring votes of the permanent members”5; that is, it is not
vetoed by any of the five permanent members. Security Council resolutions may concern
current UN activities (e.g. elections to the International Court of Justice), but are more often
adopted as part of its work to ensure the peaceful settlement of international disputes and
eliminate threats to international peace and security. Security Council resolutions may also
impose sanctions aimed at maintaining peace and security, some of which may require UN
members to introduce trade restrictive measures or controls.
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
Security Council resolution 1540, which was adopted on 28 April 2004, is a key instrument
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means
of delivery.6 This resolution obliges UN members, inter alia, to refrain from supporting by
any means non-state actors from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means
of delivery. While this resolution does not prescribe specific trade-related measures, several
UN members have introduced export controls and other trade-related measures to comply
with these obligations.
Bodies under Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
The resolution establishes a subsidiary body called the 1540 Committee that reports to the
Security Council on the implementation of the resolution.7 It comprises the 15 members
of the Security Council, and its mandate and scope of activities are derived from Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004) and other subsequent resolutions of the Security Council.
Broadly, the 1540 Committee works in the areas of monitoring and implementation of the
resolution, provision of related assistance, cooperation with other international organization
and transparency and outreach.

90 United Nations Security Council resolutions and export controls
The working groups are open to all members of the 1540 Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).8 The current 20th programme of work of the 1540
Committee covers the period from 1 February 2023 to 31 January 2024.9
The 1540 Committee is assisted by the Group of Experts.10 The Experts and its Coordinator
are appointed by the UN Secretary-General following the approval of their recruitment by
the 1540 Committee. The UN Department for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the
UN Office for Disarmament Affairs provide support to the 1540 Committee and its Group
of Experts.
Export controls under Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
While Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) does not prescribe the export controls to be
followed by UN members, it requires them to refrain from providing any form of support to
non-state actors that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, posses, transport, transfer
or use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery. They are also
required, in accordance with their domestic procedures, to adopt and enforce appropriate
effective laws that prohibit any non-state actor to manufacture, acquire, possess, develop,
transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery,
in particular for terrorist purposes, as well as attempts to engage in any of the foregoing
activities, participate in them as an accomplice, assist or finance them.
UN members, under the resolution are required to11:
(i) develop and maintain appropriate effective measures to account for and secure such
items in production, use, storage or transport;
(ii) develop and maintain appropriate effective physical protection measures;
(iii) develop and maintain appropriate effective border controls and law enforcement efforts
to detect, deter, prevent and combat, including through international cooperation when
necessary, the illicit trafficking and brokering in such items in accordance with their
domestic legal authorities and legislation and consistent with international law;
(iv) establish, develop, review and maintain appropriate effective domestic export and
transshipment controls over such items, including appropriate laws and regulations to
control export, transit, transshipment and re-export and controls on providing funds and
services related to such export and transshipment such as financing, and transporting
that would contribute to proliferation, as well as establishing end-user controls; and
establishing and enforcing appropriate criminal or civil penalties for violations of such
export control laws and regulations.
It is important to note that neither the resolution nor the 1540 Committee endorse or require
any control lists that UN members must adopt. Each of them may adopt the lists of materials,
agents or technology that it considers appropriate. However, the 1540 Committee recognizes
that several international conventions, intergovernmental organizations and multilateral or
regional agreements or arrangements have already adopted lists of sensitive goods that are
in the public domain.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 91
Domestic implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
The 1540 Committee seeks to promote implementation of the resolution by all UN members
through dialogue, outreach, assistance and cooperation. To this end, it uses several tools
in these efforts, including the so-called 1540 Committee Matrix, an assistance template12,
participation in workshops and events relevant for the implementation of the resolution and
information posted on its website.
Through Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and its follow-up resolutions, all UN
members are required to present a report (the “first report”) describing the steps they have
taken to implement the resolution and to submit such a report to the 1540 Committee.13
Further information was sought from UN members, on a voluntary basis, through subsequent
and related Security Council resolutions, such as on their laws and regulations14 and national
implementation action plans.15 Several members are in the process of either providing or
updating this information.
The information relating to the specific implementation by each UN member is compiled in
matrices, referred to generally as the 1540 Committee Matrix, which is a reference tool for
facilitating technical assistance and to enable the 1540 Committee to continue to enhance
its dialogue with UN members on their implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) and other relevant Security Council resolutions.16 A matrix for each UN member is
prepared by the group of experts based on national reports, and is subsequently reviewed
and approved by the 1540 Committee. While the information in the matrices originates
primarily from national reports provided by UN members to the 1540 Committee, it
is complemented by official government information, including that made available to
intergovernmental organizations. The reports and the matrices are periodically updated.
It should be noted that the matrices are not a tool for measuring compliance of states in their
non-proliferation obligations but for facilitating the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The 1540 Committee Matrix includes a section to review the “Border controls and export
and transshipment controls to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery including related material”. It contains information for
each UN member on issues such as border controls to detect, deter, prevent and combat
illicit trafficking; law enforcement to detect, deter, prevent and combat illicit trafficking;
border control detection measures; export control legislation in place; licensing provisions
and authority; controls lists of materials, equipment and technology; end-user controls;
transit controls; and transshipment controls, among other things. Once approved, the 1540
Committee Matrix for every UN member is made publicly available through the Security
Council website.
The 1540 Committee further encourages states to review their existing legislation and
practices, and to consider steps to fill any gaps.

92 United Nations Security Council resolutions and export controls
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and other
weapons-related international treaties
The resolution affirms support for the multilateral treaties whose aim is to eliminate or
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the importance for all states
to implement them fully. It reiterates that none of the obligations in Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) shall conflict with or alter the rights and obligations of parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction, or the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction or
alter the responsibilities of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) complements relevant multilateral treaties and
conventions by requiring all states to comply with the obligations outlined in the resolution,
irrespective of their status regarding such treaties and arrangements. Through its integrated
approach, Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) aims at preventing proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery as well as illicit trafficking
in WMD-related materials, particularly with respect to the activities of non-state actors.
The resolution is particularly relevant at the practical level. For instance, by implementing
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) states better integrate their domestic capacities –
such as with law enforcement and border control agencies – to prevent the proliferation of
illicit trafficking of WMD.
Other Security Council resolutions
As mentioned above, while Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) is broader in scope,
other resolutions may impose sanctions on specific UN members and are aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. To oversee such sanctions, the Security Council establishes
sanctions committees, composed of all Security Council members, which are tasked with
implementation of the “sanctions regimes”. The Security Council Affairs Division of the
UN Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs provides substantive and secretariat
support to these committees, in addition to also recruiting, managing and supporting groups
of experts assisting these committees. These sanctions may typically include specific
trade-related measures, such as trade embargos, or require in practice the introduction of
export controls.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 93
Endnotes
1 UN Charter, Chapter V, Article 24(1).
2 UN Charter, Chapter V, Article 23(1).
3 See UN Charter, Chapter V, Article 27. The five permanent members of the Security Council have the
so-called “veto powers”.
4 UN Charter, Chapter V, Article 25.
5 UN Charter, Chapter V, Article 27(3).
6 United Nations Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), UN document S/RES/1540 (2004),
28 April 2004.
7 Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), Operative para. 4.
8 See https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/about-1540-committee/working-groups.shtml.
9 The complete list of current and previous programmes of work of the 1540 Committee are available at
https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/about-1540-committee/programme-of-work.shtml.
10 See https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/about-1540-committee/group-of-experts.shtml.
11 See https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/faq.shtml#1.
12 The 1540 Committee developed an assistance template and encourages states in need of assistance to
use the template to submit their assistance requests. More information is available at https://www.un.org/
en/sc/1540/assistance/assistance-template.shtml.
13 National Reports are available at https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/national-implementation/national-
reports.shtml.
14 The List of Legislative Documents is available at https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/national-implementation/
legislative-database/list-of-legislative-documents.shtml.
15 National Implementation Action Plans are available at https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/national-imple-
mentation/national-implementation-plans.shtml.
16 Committee Approved Matrices are available at https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/national-implementa-
tion/1540-matrices/committee-approved-matrices.shtml.

94 Chemical Weapons Convention
Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and
their Destruction
This chapter introduces the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
their Destruction – commonly known as the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) – and its implementing body, the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and examines the provisions of the Convention
relevant to the international trade in chemicals. The OPCW seeks to achieve a
world permanently free of chemical weapons and to contribute to international
security and stability. The trade measures discussed relate to, inter alia:
the transfer-related obligations undertaken by states parties upon acceding
to the Convention; the quantitative restrictions placed on the import and
export of certain toxic chemicals relevant to the object and purpose of the
Convention; and the monitoring and verification by the Technical Secretariat
of the OPCW of such transfers, in furtherance of its mandate of promoting
non-proliferation and preventing the re-emergence of chemical weapons.
The chapter further considers these Convention-based import and export
obligations in relation to the WTO agreements and concludes with relevant
recent developments and future considerations.
Prepared by Johan Rautenbach and Vanya Kumar (Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons).

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 95
Background
The OPCW is the implementing body of the Convention.1 The OPCW seeks to achieve
a world permanently free of chemical weapons and to contribute to international security
and stability. It was established by states parties to the Convention to achieve the object
and purpose of general and complete chemical disarmament under strict and effective
international control and promoting the use of chemistry for peaceful purposes; to ensure
implementation of its provisions, including international verification of compliance with it;
and to provide a forum for consultation and cooperation among states parties.2
The OPCW consists of three organs: the two policymaking organs are the Conference of the
States Parties (CSP; 193 states parties) and the Executive Council (EC; 41 states parties);
and the third organ is the Technical Secretariat, which is responsible for the day-to-day
work of the OPCW. The Technical Secretariat verifies the destruction of chemical weapons,
conducts inspections of chemical industry and military facilities, and assists states parties in
the fulfilment of their CWC obligations.
Article I of the Convention identifies the general obligations that each state party undertakes
upon accession to the Convention. States parties are inter alia required to declare and destroy
their chemical weapons stockpiles and production facilities. They are further prohibited from
exporting or importing chemical weapons, or from providing assistance or encouragement to
other countries to develop or acquire chemical weapons.
Each state party is also required to adopt the necessary measures to ensure that toxic
chemicals and their precursors are only developed, produced, otherwise acquired, retained,
transferred or used within its territory or in any other place under its jurisdiction or control
for purposes not prohibited under the Convention.3 In particular, states parties have specific
obligations in relation to the import and export of those toxic chemicals and their precursors
which are listed in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention, as described in the section
on “Trade measures” below.
States parties acceding to the CWC undertake the obligation to review existing national
regulations in the field of trade in chemicals in order to render them consistent with the
object and purpose of the Convention.4 Trade measures under the Convention, considered
below, have effectively contributed to preventing the proliferation of chemical weapons and
promoting universal adherence to the Convention.
Trade measures
The application of trade measures, including import and export regulations and controls,
by the OPCW and the implementing states parties, is engaged primarily with respect to the
transfer regime under the Convention and related decisions of the OPCW policymaking
organs. This control regime concerns transfers of the “scheduled” chemicals (i.e. the toxic

96 Chemical Weapons Convention
chemicals and their precursors listed in Schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the Annex on Chemicals to
the Convention).5
States parties are required to make chemical industry declarations related to the mentioned
toxic chemicals and precursors, as well as to other chemical production facilities producing
discrete organic chemicals. Each state party is required to submit initial and annual
declarations regarding relevant chemicals and facilities in accordance with the Verification
Annex to the Convention.6
Decisions of the CSP also provide guidance on the implementation of the transfer-related
provisions of the Convention.7 To help further harmonize the way states parties report imports
and exports, thereby reducing the number of discrepancies where the quantities declared
by the importing and exporting states parties do not match, and considering the lack of
agreed understanding of the terms “import” and “export”, the CSP at its Thirteenth Session,
which took place in 2008, decided that:
“… solely for the purposes of submitting declarations under paragraphs 1, 8(b)
and 8(c) of Part VII and paragraph 1 of Part VIII of the Verification Annex, the term
‘import’ shall be understood to mean the physical movement of scheduled chemicals
into the territory or any other place under the jurisdiction or control of a State Party
from the territory or any other place under the jurisdiction or control of another State,
excluding transit operations; and the term ‘export’ shall be understood to mean the
physical movement of scheduled chemicals out of the territory or any other place
under the jurisdiction or control of a State Party into the territory or any other place
under the jurisdiction or control of another State, excluding transit operations”.8
These definitions are relevant with respect to the interpretation of the related provisions of
the Convention, as discussed below.
General transfer regime for scheduled chemicals
Schedule 1 chemicals
The toxic chemicals and precursors listed in Schedule 19 are those which have been
developed, produced, stockpiled or used as chemical weapons, or otherwise pose high
risk to the object and purpose of the Convention, having little or no use for purposes not
prohibited under the Convention.10 Since they pose high risk to the object and purpose
of the Convention, strict restrictions are therefore placed on transfers of such chemicals.
In particular:
(i) A state party may only transfer Schedule 1 chemicals outside its territory to
another state party to the Convention.11 Transfers to states not party to the
Convention are accordingly prohibited, as further affirmed by the OPCW
policymaking organs.12

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 97
(ii) Schedule 1 chemicals transferred cannot be retransferred to a third state.13
(iii) Purposes for which Schedule 1 chemicals can be transferred is limited to
research, medical, pharmaceutical or protective purposes – in types and
quantities which can be justified for such purposes, with an aggregate amount
given or acquired at any given time being less than or equal to 1 tonne.14
(iv) Procedures for the import and export of Schedule 1 chemicals under the
Convention involve a notification process. Both states parties involved in the
transfer are required to notify the Technical Secretariat not less than 30 days
before any such transfer.15
Additionally, not later than 90 days after the end of a year, each state party is required to
make a detailed annual declaration regarding transfers of Schedule 1 chemicals during that
year. For each transfer, such declarations must include information on the chemical name,
structural formula, any Chemical Abstracts Service registry number, quantity acquired or
transferred, the recipient and the purpose of the transfer.16
Schedule 2 chemicals
The toxic chemicals and precursors listed in Schedule 217 pose significant risk to the object
and purpose of the Convention and are not produced in large commercial quantities for
purposes not prohibited under the Convention.18 The transfers of such chemicals are also
regulated by the Convention.
Schedule 2 chemicals may only be transferred to or received from states parties. The transfer
of Schedule 2 chemicals by states parties to the Convention to states not party is accordingly
prohibited.19 This obligation took effect on 29 April 2000, three years after entry into force of
the Convention.20
The Convention does not contain general quantitative prohibitions on transfers of Schedule
2 chemicals. These are, however, monitored through state party declarations, which are
inter alia to include aggregate national data for the previous calendar year on quantities
imported and exported of each Schedule 2 chemical, as well as a quantitative specification
of import and export for each country involved.21 The national data to be aggregated includes
activity by natural and legal persons transferring a declarable chemical between the territory
of the declaring state party and the territory of other states.22
In addition, for declared Schedule 2 plant sites, states parties are required to provide data
on the quantities imported and exported of each Schedule 2 chemical produced, processed,
or consumed above the declaration threshold at the plant site, as well as information
regarding direct exports of each Schedule 2 chemical above the declaration threshold,
with a specification of the states involved.23

98 Chemical Weapons Convention
Schedule 3 chemicals
The toxic chemicals and precursors listed in Schedule 324 pose a risk to the object and
purpose of the Convention, but may also be produced in large commercial quantities for
purposes not prohibited under the Convention.25 They are therefore subject to less stringent
transfer controls than other scheduled chemicals.
Distinct from the regime governing the transfers of Schedule 1 and 2 chemicals, the
transfer of Schedule 3 chemicals to states not party to the Convention is not prohibited.
Each state party is, however, required to adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the
transferred chemicals shall only be used for purposes not prohibited under the Convention.
The transferring state party must, inter alia, require from the recipient state (not party)
certification in relation to the transferred chemicals, stating:
(i) that they will only be used for purposes not prohibited under the Convention;
(ii) that they will not be re-transferred;
(iii) their types and quantities;
(iv) their end uses; and
(v) the names and addresses of the end users.26
The Convention does not contain general quantitative prohibitions on transfers of Schedule 3
chemicals. These are, however, monitored through state party declarations, which are to include,
inter alia, aggregate national data for the previous calendar year on the quantities produced,
imported and exported of each Schedule 3 chemical, as well as a quantitative specification of
import and export for each country involved.27 A summary is provided in Table 1.
Table 1. Summary of schedules
Schedule 1 Schedule 2 Schedule 3
Poses a high risk to the Poses a significant risk to the Poses a risk to the object and
object and purpose of the object and purpose of the purpose of the Convention
Convention Convention
Precursor in final stage of Precursor to Schedule 1 or Precursor to Schedule 1 or
chemical weapon production Schedule 2A chemicals Schedule 2B chemicals
Little or no use for purposes Not produced commercially in May be produced
not prohibited by the large quantities for purposes commercially in large
Convention not prohibited by the quantities for purposes not
Convention prohibited by the Convention
For example: sarin, ricin or For example: thiodiglycol used For example: phosgene used
mustard gas for textile dyeing or dimethyl for plastics, triethanolamine
methylephosphate (DMMP) as for cosmetics/toiletries and
a flame retardant cement

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 99
Implementation considerations
Domestic legislation
States parties are under the obligation to enact national legislation, including penal
legislation, to implement their obligations under the Convention, inter alia prohibiting natural
and legal persons on their territory or under their jurisdiction from undertaking any activity
prohibited to a state party under the Convention.28 The “initial measures” envisaged under
the OPCW National Implementation Framework comprise the minimum set of legislative
measures deemed necessary for a non-possessor state party that has no declarable chemical
production facility on its territory,29 and include a comprehensive control regime for scheduled
and toxic chemicals and reporting on transfers (import and export) of scheduled chemicals,
as well as penalties for violation of the law. States parties have generally implemented the
restrictions, annual reporting and advance notification requirements in relation to the import
and export of scheduled chemicals through the enactment of domestic legislation.30
Addressing discrepancies
The implementation of transfer-related requirements by states parties, which are subject
to verification by the OPCW, indicate that declarations of import and export aggregate
national data and the level of discrepancies between declared imports and exports
(transfer discrepancies) is a long-standing issue. Factors identified as potential causes for
transfer discrepancies include:
(i) lack of effective national legislation to allow authorities to collect the necessary data;
(ii) lack of awareness among traders and industry and among customs officers;
(iii) differing approaches to declarations of trade in mixtures;
(iv) lack of harmonization in reporting due to differing understandings of the terms “import”
and “export”;
(v) trade over the year end (where export takes place at the end of one year but the import
occurs early in the following year);
(vi) simple clerical errors or confusion over units of weight.31
This issue is being addressed by the Technical Secretariat as part of its analysis of the
aggregate national data by matching up imports and exports to identify transfer discrepancies
and then writing to both states parties involved in a discrepancy to encourage them to review
their data and consult together with a view to resolving the discrepancy (OPCW, 2022).
Training and capacity building with the World
Customs Organization
Cognizant of the key role played by customs officials in monitoring the import and export of
toxic chemicals of relevance to the CWC, the OPCW and the World Customs Organization

100 Chemical Weapons Convention
signed, on 13 January 2017, a memorandum of understanding to expand cooperation and
tighten national and international controls on the trade in toxic chemicals. The memorandum
contains an agreement on measures to combat the illicit trafficking of chemicals, transfers of
which are prohibited under the CWC, and incorporates provisions for mutual consultation,
exchange of information, technical and financial cooperation, and technical meetings
and missions.32
The OPCW and World Customs Organization have co-organized several joint training courses
geared toward enhancing the capacities and capabilities of national customs authorities to
enforce the Convention’s chemical transfer regime and exercise the oversight necessary
for the trade in dual-use chemicals, thereby preventing the misuse of toxic chemicals and
promoting peaceful uses of chemistry. The training programme, which is set to continue in the
future, is regularly updated to reflect new or emerging challenges, including illicit trafficking of
chemicals through non-state actors.
Some considerations in relation to the
WTO agreements
States parties to the Convention expressly outlined their desire to “promote free trade
in chemicals” in the preamble, which is consistent with the spirit and purpose of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Transfer control and licensing procedures under
the Convention are intended to be efficient, minimize disruptions to the normal trade of
chemicals for peaceful use, and promote economic and technological development of states
parties. Subject to the provisions of the Convention and without prejudice to the principles
and applicable rules of international law, states parties have the general right to transfer
chemicals, and are required to not maintain restrictions among themselves which would
restrict or impede trade in the field of chemistry for industrial, agricultural, research, medical,
pharmaceutical or other peaceful purposes.33
Recent developments
In 2019, the CSP, at its 24th Session, approved the introduction of certain chemicals to
Schedule 1 of the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention.34 This marked the first time that
changes had been introduced to this Annex since the Convention entered into force in 1997,
demonstrating its capacity to remain fit-for-purpose in engaging with emerging threats. The
changes also signified that, for states parties, the transfer regime relating to Schedule 1
chemicals was engaged for the first time with respect to these particular chemicals. The
addition of new chemicals to the three schedules remains a possibility in the future as well.
The verified destruction of currently declared chemical weapons stockpiles is expected to be
completed in 2023. The approaching completion of global chemical weapons disarmament
as well as developments in science and technology and the expansion of global chemical

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 101
industry have been key drivers of the OPCW’s adaptation to changing strategic circumstances,
which include an increased focus on preventing the re-emergence of chemical weapons. This
mandate of the OPCW received greater impetus with the inauguration of the new OPCW
Centre for Chemistry and Technology in May 2023, which, among other activities, will allow
for capacity development activities relating to the control of trade in chemicals using state-of-
the-art facilities. Also of particular importance for the process of the OPCW adaptation are
the special sessions of the CSP, generally convened every five years, to undertake reviews
of the operation of the Convention, taking into account relevant scientific and technological
developments.35
Finally, continuing to address proliferation risks by monitoring the international transfer of
certain toxic chemicals remains an essential component in the realization of the object and
purpose of the Convention. Ensuring the enactment of Convention-based obligations within
domestic legislation in all states parties, elimination of discrepancies in reported transfer
data, capacity-building of national authorities, and promoting chemical safety and security
by providing tools and knowledge to mitigate risks arising from potential misuse of toxic
chemicals are important goals of the OPCW in the context of export controls, as is the
achievement of universality of OPCW membership. Sustained global effort, including further
international cooperation in the field of trade in chemicals and improved understanding of
the interlinked international obligations in this regard, is of benefit for the fulfilment of the
OPCW’s mandate of eliminating an entire category of weapons of mass destruction under
international verification and preventing their re-emergence.

102 Chemical Weapons Convention
Endnotes
1 The Convention opened for signature in Paris on 13 January 1993 and entered into force on 29 April 1997.
2 Article VIII, para. 1.
3 Article VI, para. 2.
4 Article XI, para. 2(e).
5 The three schedules to the Annex on Chemicals list toxic chemicals and their precursors for the purpose
of implementation of verification measures under the Convention; however, they do not constitute a
definition of “chemical weapon”, which is defined under Article II, para. 1.
6 Pursuant to Article VI, paras 7 and 8.
7 See: Guidelines Regarding Declarations of Aggregate National Data for Schedule 2 Chemical
Production, Processing, Consumption, Import and Export and Schedule 3 Import and Export, OPCW
document C-7/DEC.14, 10 October 2002; Guidelines Regarding Declaration of Import and Export
Data for Schedule 2 and 3 Chemicals, OPCW document C-13/DEC.4, 3 December 2008; and
Implementation of Restrictions on Transfers of Schedule 2 and Schedule 3 Chemicals to and from
States not Party to the Convention, OPCW document C-V/DEC.16, 17 May 2000). The guidelines do
not dictate how and on what basis states parties should collect data, but rather how the data collected
should be reported.
8 OPCW document C-13/DEC.4, para. 1.
9 These include chemicals such as sarin, VX and saxitoxin.
10 Annex on Chemicals, “Guidelines for Schedule 1”.
11 Verification Annex, Part VI, para. 1.
12 See Report of the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review the Operation
of the Chemical Weapons Convention, OPCW document RC-3/3*, 19 April 2013, para. 9.91, recalling,
in relation to transfers of scheduled chemicals to or from states not party, “the prohibitions on any such
transfers of Schedule 1 and Schedule 2 chemicals.”
13 Verification Annex, Part VI, para. 4.
14 Verification Annex, Part VI, paras 2 and 3.
15 An exception to the same is contained in the CWC: for quantities of 5 mg or less, the Schedule 1 chemical
saxitoxin is not subject to the notification period if the transfer is for medical/diagnostic purposes. In such
cases, the notification is to be made by the time of transfer (Verification Annex, Part VI, paras 5 and 5bis).
16 Verification Annex, Part VI, para. 6.
17 These include chemicals such as amiton, PFIB and BZ.
18 Annex on Chemicals, “Guidelines for Schedule 2”.
19 Verification Annex, Part VII, para. 31. This provision is inapplicable to certain products containing
Schedule 2 chemicals below established thresholds as well to products identified as consumer goods
packaged for retail sale for personal use or packaged for individual use (see OPCW document C-V/
DEC.16, para. 1).
20 Verification Annex, Part VII, para. 31 and 32. During the interim three-year period, each state party was to
require an end-use certificate for transfers of Schedule 2 chemicals to states not party to the Convention.
Each state party was also obligated to adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the transferred
chemicals would only be used for purposes not prohibited under the Convention.
21 Verification Annex, Part VII, paras 1 and 2. Initial declarations are to be submitted not later than 30 days
after the entry into force of the Convention for a state party and, thereafter, annual declarations not later
than 90 days after the end of the previous calendar year.
22 OPCW document C-7/DEC.14, para. 1.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 103
23 Verification Annex, Part VII, paras 8(b), 8(c) and 8(e)(iii). See also OPCW document C-13/DEC.4,
preambular para. 3. Part VII, para. 3 of the Verification Annex provides the following declaration
thresholds for plant sites producing, processing or consuming Schedule 2 chemicals: more than
1 kg of a chemical designated “*” in Schedule 2, part A; 100 kg of any other chemical listed in
Schedule 2, part A; or 1 tonne of a chemical listed in Schedule 2, part B.
24 These include chemicals such as phosgene, cyanogen chloride and hydrogen cyanide.
25 Annex on Chemicals, “Guidelines for Schedule 3”.
26 Verification Annex, Part VIII, para. 26. End-use certificates are not required for products containing
Schedule 3 chemicals below an established threshold nor for products identified as consumer
goods packaged for retail sale for personal use or packaged for individual use (see Provisions on
Transfers of Schedule 3 Chemicals to States not Party to the Convention, OPCW document C-VI/
DEC.10, 17 May 2001, para. 2).
27 Verification Annex, Part VIII, paras 1 and 2. Part VIII, para. 3 of the Verification Annex provides
the following declaration thresholds for plant sites producing Schedule 3 chemicals: more than
30 tonnes.
28 Pursuant to Article VII, para. 1.
29 This indicates that these are measures that states parties would have to take irrespective of any
chemical weapon destruction obligations or the state of their chemical industry.
30 According to the latest reported data of 31 July 2022, out of the 193 states parties to the Convention,
158 had adopted national implementing legislation, of which 122 had legislation covering all the
initial measures and 36 had legislation covering some of the initial measures. Thirty-five states parties
had yet to report on the adoption of any relevant legislation (see Report by the Director-General:
Overview of the Status of Implementation of Article VII of the Chemical Weapons Convention as
at 31 July 2022, OPCW document EC-101/DG.13* C-27/DG.9, 9 September 2022, paras 7
and 16).
31 See also: OPCW document EC-XXIII/S.1, 12 January 2001; and OPCW document EC-67/S/1,
16 January 2012.
32 The capacity development activities relevant to the control of trade in chemicals primarily target
customs administrations as the authorities which provide data on the import and export of scheduled
chemicals. The trainings at times also involve national authorities due to their role in receiving the
customs data and making annual declarations.
33 Pursuant to Article XI, para. 2, in particular para. 2(c).
34 In accordance with Article XV, paras 4 and 5. See also: Technical Change to Schedule 1(A) of
the Annex on Chemicals to the Chemical Weapons Convention, OPCW document C-24/DEC.4,
27 November 2019; and Changes to Schedule 1 of the Annex on Chemicals to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, OPCW document C-24/DEC.5, 27 November 2019; and Consolidated
Text of Adopted Changes to Schedule 1 of the Annex on Chemicals to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, OPCW document S/1820/2019, 23 December 2019.
35 Article VIII, para. 22. The Fifth Review Conference took place on 15-19 May 2023.

104 Arms Trade Treaty
Arms Trade Treaty
The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) is an international treaty that regulates
international trade in conventional arms by establishing the highest
international standards governing arms transfers and seeks to prevent and
eradicate their illicit trade and diversion.1 The Treaty requires states parties
to set-up a national control system and take regulatory measures to control
the export, import, transit, transshipment and brokering of, as a minimum,
eight categories of major conventional arms, as well as to provide transparency
about their imports and exports. To support effective implementation of these
requirements, the ATT foresees international cooperation and assistance,
mandates the Conference of States Parties (CSP) to review implementation
on a continuous basis, including the consideration of recommendations and
interpretation issues, and establishes a Secretariat to assist states parties in
their implementation efforts. This chapter describes the basics of the Treaty
and explains its scope and substantive requirements, as well as the measures
states parties need to or can take to implement those requirements, with a
focus on export controls.
Prepared by the Arms Trade Treaty Secretariat.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 105
Background
The ATT was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 2 April 2013, following
a process that was initiated at the UN level in 2006, eleven years after a group of Nobel
Peace Laureates first called for such an initiative and presented their own International Code
of Conduct on Arms Transfers. The adoption of the ATT by the United Nations General
Assembly followed two diplomatic conferences where no consensus could be reached about
a draft text that nonetheless enjoyed an overwhelming level of support. The Treaty opened
for signature on 3 June 2013 and entered into force on 24 December 2014. At the time of
writing, 113 states have become states parties to the Treaty and 28 states have signed the
Treaty but not yet ratified it.2
Despite the fact that the ATT regulates international trade, the Treaty was not discussed
within the WTO but under the auspices of the First Committee of the United Nations General
Assembly, which deals with disarmament and international security. The potential application
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was also not under debate in the
negotiations and the Treaty, including its preamble, does not include any reference to GATT or
other general trade agreements. While the Treaty recognizes the legitimate political, security,
economic and commercial interests of states in the international arms trade and respects
their legitimate interests to acquire conventional arms to exercise their right to self-defence
and for peacekeeping operations, and to produce, export, import and transfer conventional
arms, the Treaty also clarifies in Article 1 that its purpose is humanitarian in nature, not to
facilitate or deregulate trade in these products:3
“The object of this Treaty is to:
- Establish the highest possible common international standards for regulating or
improving the regulation of the international trade in conventional arms;
- Prevent and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms and prevent
their diversion;
for the purpose of:
- Contributing to international and regional peace, security and stability;
- Reducing human suffering;
- Promoting cooperation, transparency and responsible action by States Parties
in the international trade in conventional arms, thereby building confidence
among States Parties.”
The ATT framework consists of two important structures: the CSP and the ATT Secretariat.
The working of the two structures is funded through mandatory assessed contributions by
states parties (and other states participating in CSP meetings). Their basic tasks are defined
in Articles 17 and 18 of the Treaty.

106 Arms Trade Treaty
The CSP is the decision-making body in the ATT framework. Substantively, the CSP is
mandated to review the implementation of the Treaty and to consider: (i) recommendations
regarding the implementation and operation of the Treaty; (ii) amendments to the Treaty;
and (iii) issues arising from the interpretation of the Treaty. For that purpose, the CSP has
established a number of subsidiary bodies. Most importantly are the standing working
groups. Currently, these are the Working Group on Effective Treaty Implementation (WGETI),
the Working Group on Transparency and Reporting (WGTR) and the Working Group on
Treaty Universalization (WGTU).
The WGETI is the most important body with respect to the practice of transfer controls.
It acts as a forum for states parties to exchange information and challenges on the practical
implementation of the Treaty at the national level, and to address specific issues set by CSP
as priorities to take Treaty implementation forward. It has delivered a substantial body of
voluntary guidance on Treaty implementation.4
Complementary to the working groups is the Diversion Information Exchange Forum. This is a
subsidiary body for informal voluntary exchanges between states parties and signatory states
concerning concrete cases of detected or suspected diversion and for sharing concrete,
operational diversion-related information.
The ATT Secretariat manages the reporting process under the Treaty, maintains a database of
national points of contact and facilitates the matching of offers of and requests for assistance
for Treaty implementation. It facilitates the work of the CSP and performs other duties as
decided by the CSP, including supporting the work of the President of Conference and
the subsidiary bodies during the preparatory phase leading up to each CSP. In addition,
the ATT Secretariat also administers the Voluntary Trust Fund and a sponsorship programme
to facilitate the participation of state representatives in ATT meetings.
Overview of Treaty requirements
The Treaty regulates the international trade in conventional arms. In terms of activities,
“international trade” applies to the following types, which are commonly referred to as
“transfer”: export, import, transit, transshipment and brokering. The Treaty does not define
these activities. Its scope excludes the international movement of conventional arms by, or on
behalf of, a state party for its use provided that the conventional arms remain under that state
party’s ownership. The Treaty does not regulate and control conventional arms exclusively
within the territory of states parties; it therefore does not apply to, for example, the domestic
production and possession of firearms.
In terms of goods, the minimum scope of conventional arms that states parties need to
subject to control concerns the following categories:

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 107
(a) battle tanks;
(b) armoured combat vehicles;
(c) large calibre artillery systems;
(d) combat aircraft;
(e) attack helicopters;
(f) warships;
(g) missiles and missile launchers;
(h) small arms and light weapons.
States parties can apply national definitions of those categories, but these cannot cover less
than the descriptions used in the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms at the time
of entry into force of the Treaty for categories (a)-(g) and the descriptions used in relevant UN
instruments at the time of entry into force of the Treaty for category (h).5
States parties are also encouraged to apply the provisions of the Treaty to the broadest
range of conventional arms. In that respect, reference is often made to the Munitions List
of the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use
Goods and Technologies, which contains 22 main entries on items designed for military
use.6 The main obligations of the Treaty also apply to ammunition/munitions fired, launched or
delivered by the listed categories of conventional arms, as well as their parts and components
delivered in a form that provides the capability to assemble the arms in question. The range
of arms and other items that a state party subjects to control – which can vary according to
the type of transfer beyond the minimum scope – needs to be included in a national control
list. This list then needs to be provided to the ATT Secretariat, which will make it available to
other states parties. States parties are also encouraged to make the list publicly available.
National control system – Article 5(2)
The overarching obligation for each state party is to establish and maintain a national control
system, including a national control list, in order to implement the provisions of the Treaty. In
concrete terms, such a control system needs to contain legislation, regulations, administrative
procedures, enforcement arrangements and institutions that enable a state to apply the
substantive obligations of the Treaty in practice and to effectively control the import, export,
transit, transshipment and brokering of conventional arms and their ammunition/munitions,
parts and components.
Transfer control requirements – Articles 6 to 11
Article 6 of the Treaty concerns prohibited transfers of the aforementioned categories
of conventional arms, ammunition/munitions and parts and components.7 States parties
need to prevent the respective types of transfer in a number of circumstances.
These prohibitions make the link between states’ broader international obligations and arms
transfers explicit. States parties are required to prevent import, export, transit, transshipment
and brokering when:

108 Arms Trade Treaty
(1) it would violate measures adopted by the United Nations Security Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular arms embargoes;
(2) it would violate relevant international obligations under the state’s international
agreements, in particular those relating to the transfer of, or illicit trafficking in,
conventional arms;
(3) it has knowledge at the time of authorization that the arms or items would be
used in the commission of genocide, crimes against humanity, grave breaches
of the Geneva Conventions of 1949, attacks directed against civilian objects
or civilians protected as such, or other war crimes as defined by international
agreements to which the state is a party.
Subsequently, the Treaty provides additional obligations per type of transfer, which require
varying degrees of control. Other important Treaty obligations concern export of the
aforementioned arms and items. Beyond the circumstances in which all transfers, including
export, are prohibited, states parties are required to subject all exports to authorization to allow
an assessment against a number of criteria. If states parties assess that there is an overriding
risk of any of the negative consequences in these criteria, even after having considered
possible mitigating measures, they are required to deny authorization of the export. Like the
prohibitions in Article 6, the assessment criteria in Article 7 are steeped in international law.
States parties are required to assess the potential that the conventional arms or items:
(a) would contribute to or undermine peace and security;
(b) could be used to:
(i) commit or facilitate a serious violation of international humanitarian law;
(ii) commit or facilitate a serious violation of international human rights law;
(iii) commit or facilitate an act constituting an offence under international
conventions or protocols relating to terrorism to which the exporting state
is a party;
(iv) commit or facilitate an act constituting an offence under international
conventions or protocols relating to transnational organized crime to which
the exporting state is a party.
In their assessment, states parties also need to take into account the risk of the items being
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of gender-based violence or serious acts of violence
against women and children.
Concerning import, transit and transshipment, as well as brokering, the additional obligations
are less specific. The focus therefore is on preventing the circumstances included in
Article 6 and preventing diversion. The specific provisions on these types of transfer
generally require states parties to take measures to regulate these types of transfer,
albeit only “where necessary and feasible”, or “pursuant to its national laws”. While these
provisions only refer to the eight categories of conventional arms in Article 2(1), states parties
need to take into account that they still need apply the prohibitions in Article 6 to import,
transit and transshipment, and brokering of the aforementioned other items as well.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 109
A crucial requirement across-the-board of all types of transfer concerns the obligation to
take measures to prevent diversion. This obligation applies to all states parties involved in
arms transfers because diversion can occur in all stages of the transfer chain, from the point
of embarkation to the point of storage and use. States parties need to take this into account
when developing their national control system. Article 11 also specifically requires importing,
transit, transshipment and exporting states parties to cooperate and exchange information
to mitigate the risk of diversion. An exporting state party in particular is required to conduct
a diversion risk assessment and consider establishing mitigation and preventive measures.
Additional requirements: record-keeping and reporting –
Articles 12 and 13
Next to the obligation to provide control measures, states parties also are required to keep
records on authorized or actual exports – with an encouragement to do the same for import,
transit and transshipment – and to report annually to the ATT Secretariat on authorized or
actual exports and imports in the preceding year. Both obligations apply as a minimum to
the eight categories of conventional arms in Article 2(1). In addition to the annual report,
states parties also need to provide an initial report on their implementation measures,
as well as updates, and are encouraged to report on effective diversion prevention measures.
Especially the annual reporting requirement is a key obligation of the Treaty for the purpose
of transparency, explicitly mentioned in Article 1, and accountability, as these reports reflect
states parties’ application of the Treaty in practice. In light thereof, these reports are made
available to all other states parties, while most states parties also agree to their reports
being made publicly available on the ATT website.8 As a testament to the importance, of the
annual reporting obligation a comprehensive guidance document was developed within the
ATT framework to assist states parties in preparing their reports.9
Export-related measures
As explained in the previous section, the Treaty requires states parties to subject exports
to authorization and assessment and to set-up a national control system to comply with
these requirements. The Treaty is mostly silent, however, on how to do this and which
measures to take. This was deliberate in part, acknowledging that the involvement of states
around the world in the international arms trade varies significantly. In that regard, the
Voluntary Basic Guide to Establishing a National Control System, which was developed
within the ATT framework, explains that the ATT does not specify a one-size-fits-all approach
for the national control system and that each state party has a discretion depending on
its size, resources, export profile and legislative as well as institutional/constitutional
framework.10 Many states are also a party to other international or regional instruments that
provide similar regimes, which can require stricter or more expansive controls, or provide
more explicit obligations and/or guidance regarding practical implementation. This does
not mean that there are no common approaches among states parties and good practices.
These practices do exist, and such practices have also been identified in the aforementioned
body of guidance documents that have been developed within the ATT framework.

110 Arms Trade Treaty
In that regard, the basic export control measure that states apply as part of their national
control system is a regime of prior authorization, mostly laid down in national legislation,
for all items included in its national (export) control list. This allows the state to apply the
export assessment criteria, which may or may not be included in a legislative act. The basic
framework is supplemented with regulations that set out a process and the information and
documentation that needs to be supplied and administrative procedures for processing and
deciding applications.
Export authorization regime
The export authorization regime mostly involves a systematic licence (or permit) requirement
for all exports, with states applying different types of licence that vary in degree of flexibility.
Next to the traditional “individual” licence, which authorizes the export of a set quantity of arms
to a specific recipient, states also apply more flexible licences, such as open and general
licences. These generally allow exporters to export an undetermined quantity of arms to one
or more recipients, certain types of recipient (e.g. armed forces) or for a specific purpose
(e.g. a specific armament programme), either after authorization or a simple registration.
This is often combined with post-export reporting requirements. States mostly use such
licences for low-risk transfers, which states generally consider unproblematic in light of
Articles 6, 7 and 11 of the Treaty, based on a relationship of trust (confidence) between the
states involved. A good example of this is the licensing regime which EU member states are
required to operate for transfers within the European Union itself.11 A very specific licensing
regime is also applied to import of small arms and light weapons by member states of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The ECOWAS Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, their Ammunition and other related Materials provides a
system of a general transfer ban and possible exemption requests that are processed via the
ECOWAS Executive Secretariat, following consultations with all ECOWAS member states.
Next to requiring export authorizations, some states also reserve access to their export
authorization regime – or to flexible licence types – to registered entities that have
demonstrated their ability to comply with export regulations and exercise due diligence in
their business relationships.
Authorities, processes and information
The Treaty itself obliges states parties in Article 5(5) and 5(6) to designate competent
national authorities in order to have an effective and transparent national control system, as
well as each state party shall designate one or more national points of contact.12 The Treaty
also presupposes dedicated procedures to be put in place, to enable the exporting state
to conduct the required risk assessment and prevent diversion. In that respect, states need
to provide a clear application process, regulations and instructions to potential applicants,
to ensure that it can apply measures such as those included in Articles 8(1) and 11(2):
examining parties involved in the export, requiring end-use or end-user documentation,
additional information and assurances. To this effect, the Treaty also focuses on cooperation

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 111
between the states parties involved in the transfer. Next to a general cooperation requirement
in Article 14, Article 8(1) obliges importing states parties to take measures to ensure that
appropriate and relevant information is provided to the exporting state party. Article 11(3)
obliges all states involved in a transfer to exchange information to mitigate the risk of
diversion. Extensive guidance on these aspects is included in the aforementioned Voluntary
Basic Guide to Establishing a National Control System and the document with possible
measures to prevent and address diversion.13
Export assessment
The consistent, objective and non-discriminatory application of the prohibitions in Article 6
and the export assessment in Article 7, as well as the diversion risk assessment in Article 11, is
the core element of the export authorization regime. States parties need to equip themselves
to make prospective assessments of the future behaviour of the recipients of the arms to be
exported, how they are likely to behave and how the arms to be transferred will likely be used,
based on historic behaviour, present circumstances and reasonable expectations.14
As part of the export assessment, states also need to consider mitigating measures. The Treaty
focuses on cooperation between the exporting and importing states. Both Articles 7(2) and
11(2) refer to confidence-building measures and jointly developed and agreed programmes
as examples of mitigating measures.
For the purpose of this assessment, most states establish a process that involves a multitude
of different government entities to inform decision-makers and use a wide range of information
sources, both public and restricted, beyond the information provided by exporters and
importing states. Because a comprehensive, consistent and well-informed assessment is
so important, the implementation of the relevant provisions is extensively discussed in the
ATT framework. While a specific voluntary guide to implementing Articles 6 and 7 is under
development, lists of possible reference documents for the risk assessment under Articles 7
and 11 have already been developed, as well as elements of a process for the diversion
risk assessment.15
Post-export control
The Treaty does not explicitly require states parties to apply any form of control on exported
arms after their delivery. In the post-export realm, the Treaty only encourages exporting states
parties to reassess authorizations if they become aware of new relevant information after an
authorization has been granted, after consultations with the importing state, if appropriate.
Additionally, the abovementioned examples of mitigating measures to reduce the risk of
misuse or diversion through cooperation between the exporting and importing state can also
be understood to have post-export elements in it. In that respect, guidance on post-delivery
controls is also included in the aforementioned document with possible measures to prevent
and address diversion.16

112 Arms Trade Treaty
Enforcement
On enforcement, the Treaty itself, in Article 14, simply obliges states parties to take
“appropriate measures” to enforce the requirements it has introduced into its national control
system to regulate the different types of transfer. The Treaty does not prescribe their nature.
Generally, states parties supplement proportionate and dissuasive sanctions with providing
enforcement bodies with adequate powers to inspect and (temporarily) seize (suspicious)
items and shipments, interagency cooperation arrangements and preventive measures such
as outreach to those involved in arms transfers. The Treaty does oblige states, where possible,
to assist one another in investigations, prosecutions and to share relevant information,
for example regarding illicit activities and actors. Article 11, on diversion, also highlights the
need for enforcement measures and cooperation, inter alia via the sharing of operational
diversion-related information. The latter is also encouraged within the ATT framework,
as the aforementioned Diversion Information Exchange Forum was established for this
specific purpose, as a complement to bilateral exchanges.
Other transfers of arms
In addition to the provisions discussed above, the ATT also deals with specific measures
states parties (need to) adopt as part of their national control system to implement the import,
transit and transshipment and brokering requirements – information on which is available on
the ATT website. It should also be noted that most states involved in the international arms
trade regulate are not arms producing and exporting states. In that respect, the WGETI has a
specific sub-working group dealing with transit and transshipment, which is in the process of
developing draft elements for a possible voluntary guide on the implementation of Article 9.17
Recent developments
As explained in the Background, a comprehensive understanding of the substantive Treaty
obligations and their effective implementation have been a priority within the ATT framework,
next to transparency and universalization. This will continue, as the consideration of
recommendations regarding the implementation of the Treaty and of issues arising from the
interpretation of the Treaty are focus areas of the ATT framework. With the establishment of
the Diversion Information Exchange Forum, the ATT framework has also created a platform
for states parties (and signatory states) to engage in exchanges about concrete cases and
operational information. While the Treaty does not include a formal review clause, it has been
possible for states parties to propose amendments to the Treaty from the end of 2020. At the
time of writing, no such proposals have been submitted. How all these aspects will develop
is dependent on several factors, including the aspirations and commitments of states parties,
the further universalization of the Treaty and geopolitical evolution.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 113
Endnotes
1 The Treaty text, the ATT Universalization Toolkit and Welcome Pack for new states parties are available from
the ATT website at https://www.thearmstradetreaty.org.
2 Information on participation in the ATT, including a regional overview, is available from https://www.
thearmstradetreaty.org/treaty-status.html?templateId=209883.
3 For the discussions on this issue, see chapter 3 of Small Arms Survey (2014) and Clapham et al. (2016).
4 See https://www.thearmstradetreaty.org/tools-and-guidelines.html.
5 These descriptions have been reproduced in annexes 1 and 3 of the FAQ-style guidance document on the
annual reporting obligation (Reporting Authorized or Actual Exports and Imports of Conventional Arms
under the ATT, ATT document ATT/CSP8.WGTR/2022/CHAIR/734/Conf.Rep, 22 July 2022).
6 The Wassenaar Arrangement is an informal intergovernmental regime founded to promote greater
responsibility in transfers of conventional arms and dual-use goods and technologies. Its participating
states are required to control all items set forth in its Munitions List, updated annually, with the objective of
preventing unauthorized transfers or re-transfers of those items. The Munitions List also forms the basis for
the Common Military List of the European Union.
7 As well as the other arms and items which states parties have opted to include in their national control lists.
8 See https://www.thearmstradetreaty.org/annual-reports.html.
9 The FAQ-style guidance document on the annual reporting obligation (ATT document ATT/CSP8.
WGTR/2022/CHAIR/734/Conf.Rep) was endorsed by the CSP in 2017 and updated in 2019 and 2021
(see https://www.thearmstradetreaty.org/reporting.html).
10 The Voluntary Basic Guide is available from https://www.thearmstradetreaty.org/tools-and-guidelines.html.
It is noted that the Guide is not fully completed and that certain sections will be developed following
discussions on these areas within the ATT framework.
11 See Directive 2009/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 simplifying terms
and conditions of transfers of defence-related products within the Community. The directive also allows EU
member states to completely exempt certain transfers from the prior authorization requirement.
12 States parties can consult a database of national points of contact in a restricted area of the ATT website.
13 The Voluntary Basic Guide and the document with possible measures to prevent and address diversion is
available from https://www.thearmstradetreaty.org/tools-and-guidelines.html.
14 In that respect, the components of Articles 6 and 7 can be applied jointly in one assessment, also because
some elements refer to similar legal instruments, as long as states parties respect the different features
of these respective obligations. If a state establishes that one of the prohibitions in Article 6 is applicable,
it needs to simply stop the export; there is no question of taking into account certain other considerations or
considering mitigating measures as there is when conducting the risk assessment under Article 7.
15 A draft chapter 1 (key concepts) of the proposed Voluntary Guide (Annex A) was completed in 2022
(see ATT Working Group on Effective Treaty Implementation: Chair’s Draft Report To CSP8, ATT document
ATT/CSP8.WGETI/2022/CHAIR/733/Conf.Rep, 22 July 2022). The lists of possible reference documents
to be considered by states parties in conducting a risk assessment under Article 7 and to prevent and
address diversion are available from https://www.thearmstradetreaty.org/tools-and-guidelines.html.
A voluntary paper outlining the elements of a process for assessing the risk of diversion can be found
in the annex to ATT Working Group on Effective Treaty Implementation: Chair’s Draft Report To CSP7,
ATT document ATT/CSP7.WGETI/2021/CHAIR/675/Conf.Rep, 22 July 2021.
16 In 2022, post-shipment controls and coordination was also specifically discussed in the ATT framework,
inter alia, with a recommendation to share and learn from national experiences with post-export controls
within the ATT framework (see: para. 21 of the Final Report of the 8th CSP, ATT document ATT/CSP8/2022/
SEC/739/Conf.FinRep.Rev 2, 26 August 2022; Working Paper Presented by the President of the Eight
Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), ATT document ATT/CSP8/2022/PRES/732/
Conf.PostShip, 22 July 2022).
17 These draft elements will be discussed (and supplemented) in 2023, during the 9th cycle of the CSP.

114 Australia Group
Australia Group
The Australia Group (AG) is a multilateral export control regime that works to
impede the proliferation of chemical and biological weapons, including their
delivery systems and supporting programmes. Australia is the permanent
chair of the AG and hosts its secretariat.
Through the harmonization of export controls based on common control
lists and the exchange and publication of information, cooperation among
AG participants aims to prevent would-be proliferators and terrorists from
exploiting differences or ambiguities in national export control arrangements.
The principal objective of AG participants is to use licensing measures to
control the export of certain chemicals, biological agents, and dual-use
chemical and biological manufacturing facilities and equipment. The AG
regularly updates its control lists on the basis of expert-level discussion and
consensus. These are then implemented in accordance with AG participants’
national frameworks and sovereign decision-making.
The AG’s effectiveness is based on a shared commitment to counter-proliferation
objectives and the strength of each participating state’s export control
framework; as well as the transparency of its common control lists which are
publicly available to both AG participants and non-participants. AG activities
do not hinder legitimate trade involving chemicals, biological agents and
dual-use items and equipment. Instead, the AG helps increase the awareness,
confidence, trust and assurance necessary to make peaceful trade of these
items possible. AG participants are committed to expanding trade in chemical
and biological items for peaceful purposes and maintaining active chemical
and biotechnological industries.
Prepared by the Australia Group Secretariat.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 115
Background
The Australia Group (AG) was founded in 1985, in the wake of chemical weapons use in
the Iran–Iraq war. In response, Australia, 14 other participating countries and the European
Commission came together to form the AG, where a common control list of chemicals
and equipment was developed and agreed to. These countries shared this information to
encourage others to better understand and implement export controls.
Evidence of the diversion of dual-use materials to biological weapons programmes in the
early 1990s led to the controls evolving and expanding further to prevent the proliferation of
biological weapons, with controls on specific biological agents. The control lists now include
technologies and equipment which could be used in the manufacturing or disposal of both
chemical and biological weapons.
The AG is an informal arrangement with no legally binding obligations for participants.
Cooperation among AG participants contributes to global security and helps participants
fulfil their international non-proliferation obligations under the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction (CWC), the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction
(BWC) and United Nations Security Council resolution 1540.1
Participants and adherence
The name of the AG reflects Australia’s role in initiating the first meeting of the group.
The number of participants has now expanded to 43 (42 countries and the European Union).
The most recent countries to join were Mexico in 2013 and India in 2018 (see Table 1).
Countries interested in joining the AG should, in the first instance, provide an expression of
interest to the AG Chair through the AG Secretariat.2 The Chair will then seek the views of
AG participants and list the request for discussion at the next AG meeting. Decisions on new
AG participants are made by consensus by all AG participants.
Criteria for participation are published on the AG website. They include, but are not limited to:
• a commitment to prevent the spread of chemical and biological weapon (CBW)
proliferation, including being a party, in good standing, to the CWC and the
BWC;
• being a manufacturer, exporter or transshipper of AG controlled items;
• adopting and implementing the AG Guidelines for Transfers of Sensitive
Chemical or Biological Items;
• implementing an effective export control system which provides national controls
for all items on the AG Common Control Lists and is supported by adequate
licensing and enforcement regimes;

116 Australia Group
Table 1. Australia Group participants and initial year of joining
Participants Year Participants Year
Australia 1985 Latvia 2004
Austria 1989 Lithuania 2004
Belgium 1985 Luxembourg 1985
Bulgaria 2001 Malta 2004
Canada 1985 Mexico 2013
Croatia 2007 Netherlands 1985
Cyprus 2000 New Zealand 1985
Czech Republic 1994 Norway 1986
Denmark 1985 Poland 1994
Estonia 2004 Portugal 1985
European Union 1985 Romania 1995
Finland 1991 Slovak Republic 1994
France 1985 Slovenia 2004
Germany 1985 Spain 1985
Greece 1985 Sweden 1991
Hungary 1993 Switzerland 1987
Iceland 1993 Türkiye 2000
India 2018 Ukraine 2005
Ireland 1985 United Kingdom 1985
Italy 1985 United States 1985
Japan 1985
• creating legal penalties and sanctions for contravention of controls and being
willing to enforce them;
• creating relevant channels for the exchange of information including: accepting
the confidentiality of the information exchange; creating liaison channels for expert
discussions; and creating a denial notification system protecting commercial
confidentiality; and
• agreeing to participate in the AG in a way that will strengthen the effectiveness of
the AG in preventing CBW proliferation.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 117
Countries can also make a political commitment to adhere to the AG Guidelines and Control
Lists by notifying the AG Chair. This adherence is unilateral by the non-participant country
and not subject to any acceptance decision by the AG membership. Kazakhstan made such
a declaration in 2015.
The AG strongly encourages all states to adopt its guidelines and control lists, which are
freely published on its website and made available to participants and non-participants,
industry, academia and research institutions — as a guide to developing their own export
control frameworks.3
Trade-related measures: export controls
Cooperation among AG participants aims to prevent would-be proliferators from
exploiting differences or ambiguities in national export control arrangements. The principal
objective of AG participants is to use licensing measures to control the export of certain
chemicals, biological agents, and dual-use chemical and biological manufacturing facilities
and equipment.
AG participants harmonize their export controls by utilizing the regularly reviewed
AG Common Control Lists, which outline items participants undertake to control through
export licensing procedures. These licensing measures are consistent, transparent and
publicly available, helping industry to understand licensing arrangements and the reasons
for them.
There are a number of important factors AG participants take into consideration when
implementing their exporting licensing measures. These include:
• that the measures be effective in impeding the production of CBWs;
• that they should be reasonably easy and economical to implement; and
• that they should not impede the normal trade of materials and equipment used
for legitimate purposes.
Importantly, licensing measures do not constitute automatic bans on such items. In practice
they are monitoring and control arrangements for exports: an export is denied only if there is
particular concern about potential diversion for CBW purposes.
AG consultations and licensing measures have raised the cost to would-be proliferators.
They have succeeded in raising the awareness of participating countries and their industries
about the risks of inadvertent association with CBW and has helped them avoid this danger.
The AG recognizes that export licensing measures on CBW precursors, equipment and
technology need to be maintained by as many relevant supplier or transhipment countries as
possible to be effective.

118 Australia Group
Relationship with other international
weapons conventions
All participants in the AG are states parties to both the CWC and the BWC. In addition
to states parties’ application of the non-proliferation provisions of the CWC and BWC,
appropriate domestic measures are required of all states to ensure compliance with United
Nations Security Council Resolution 1540. The resolution affirms support for the multilateral
treaties whose aim is to eliminate or prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). Resolution 1540 obligates all countries to combat the spread of chemical, biological,
and nuclear weapons, their means of delivery, and illicit trafficking in related materials within
or across their borders. This includes denying non-state actors WMD access. Resolution
1540 also encourages enhanced international cooperation in this regard. By cooperating on
the application of effective national export and transhipment controls, AG participation assists
states with resolution 1540 commitments. By applying suitable export licensing measures
AG participants demonstrate determination to avoid involvement in the proliferation of these
weapons and uphold resolution 1540.
In complying with their international obligations, AG participants seek to ensure that
international trade in chemical and biological products for peaceful purposes is not impaired.
Both the CWC and BWC require states parties not to restrict peaceful trade. Article XI
of the CWC recognizes that the eradication of illicit trade is necessary for the unfettered
development of legitimate trade, thereby acknowledging that export measures instituted and
maintained solely to implement obligations under the CWC, are valid.
Similarly, Article III of the BWC specifies that states parties should not transfer agents
or materials for purposes contrary to the BWC. Article X establishes that the BWC
“shall be implemented in a manner designed to avoid hampering the economic or technological
development of States Parties to the Convention”.
The AG works alongside other multilateral export control regimes which together help
underpin global security by providing guidance, norms and standards for the peaceful
trade of technology along with assurances of the origin, destination and end-user of relevant
dual-use goods and technologies.
Impact of AG export licensing measures
AG controls have only a minimal impact on total trade in chemicals, biological agents and
dual-use items and equipment. Export licences deter proliferation by increasing visibility of
trade in relevant materials and provide the ability for a national authority to stop a sale if the
product concerned is likely to contribute to a CBW programme.
The AG’s activities are limited to counter-proliferation measures and are neither intended to
favour the commercial development of industries in AG participants, nor to hinder legitimate
economic development in other countries.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 119
Outreach
AG participants ensure that the private sector in their respective jurisdictions are informed of
the dangers inherent in the uncontrolled export of relevant chemical and biological materials
and equipment. Companies, conscious of their public image and corporate responsibilities,
welcome the assurances provided by the AG controls. The transparency generated by AG
participation increases confidence, helping create an environment where international trade
in chemical and biological products for peaceful purposes is not impaired.
The AG maintains a practice of briefing non-participants on its activities as well as industry
and academia. These briefings include highlighting the publicly available lists of chemicals,
biological agents, and related equipment and technologies which are of proliferation concern.
These outreach measures have resulted in a number of countries exploring the possibility of
participating in the AG, either as a potential participant or unilateral adherent. It has also
contributed to a number of countries strengthening their export controls to inhibit illicit WMD
programmes on the basis of the AG lists.
Institutional mechanisms and control lists
All decisions in the AG are made by consensus. The AG holds annual Plenary and
Intersessional meetings. The Plenary is supported by the following subgroup meetings which
bring together national and technical experts:
• Implementation Meeting: to discuss and agree to updates to the control lists;
• Enforcement Exchange: to build a shared awareness of current AG enforcement
issues and mitigation strategies to assist participants in developing best practice;
• Information Exchange: to share updated information about CBW programmes
and their proliferation networks; and
• New and Evolving Technologies Technical Experts Meeting (NETTEM): to identify
emerging technological trends that may have proliferation impacts.
The AG Common Control Lists comprise certain chemicals, biological agents, equipment,
technology and software able to be used in the manufacture, storage, transport, dispersion
and disposal of CBWs. These control lists apply export licensing measures to the export of:
• chemical weapons precursors;
• human and animal pathogens and toxins;
• plant pathogens;
• dual-use chemical manufacturing equipment and related technology/software; and
• dual-use biological equipment and related technology/software.
Noting the AG Common Control Lists are a benchmark for global best practice, AG
participants regularly work to refine controls applied to the chemical and biological items
on the lists, via discussions among national technical experts. This includes agreeing to new

120 Australia Group
items on the AG Common Control Lists in response to emerging threats, and the removal of
items where they are no longer appropriate.
Export licence applications based on AG controls are examined by AG participants’
national authorities and are given effect in accordance with individual national export control
frameworks. The AG “no undercut” policy ensures participants are following a common
approach to controls on CBW-related exports. Where one participant has denied the export
of an AG-listed item for CBW non-proliferation reasons, other participants commit to not
agreeing to approve essentially identical export licence applications without first consulting
with the participant that issued the original denial.
Recent developments
The AG continues to work to keep itself relevant and effective, including by prioritizing the
understanding of emerging technologies and new proliferation risks. The annual Plenary and
Intersessional meetings are opportunities to exchange information on these developments.
In recent meetings, participants have agreed to reinforce efforts to stay ahead of potential
proliferators by increasing awareness of the potential exploitation of scientific developments
that could be used for CBW. They share approaches to challenges posed by intangible
technology transfer or ITT (transfer of technology through non-physical means), proliferation
financing, procurement, transshipment and broader proliferation networks, including through
enhanced engagement with industry and academia. They also share approaches for keeping
pace with rapid developments in dual-use technologies, such as synthetic biology and novel
delivery systems.
The AG stands ready to engage all interested states in outreach activities – either in person
or virtually – should they to wish to learn more about what the AG does. Contact details can
be found on the AG website.4

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 121
Endnotes
1 United Nations Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), UN document S/RES/1540 (2004),
28 April 2004.
2 See https://www.dfat.gov.au/publications/minisite/theaustraliagroupnet/site/en/index.html.
3 Available at https://www.dfat.gov.au/publications/minisite/theaustraliagroupnet/site/en/index.html.
4 Available at https://www.dfat.gov.au/publications/minisite/theaustraliagroupnet/site/en/index.html.

122 Wassenaar Arrangement
Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and
Dual-Use Goods and Technologies
Since its establishment in 1996, the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies
(Wassenaar Arrangement) has served as an intergovernmental forum
contributing to international security and stability by facilitating confidence
building and information sharing, and promoting transparency and greater
responsibility in transfers of conventional arms and dual-use goods and
technologies. It aims to prevent potentially dangerous build-ups of arms
which could adversely affect regional and international security and stability
(known as destabilizing accumulations) as well as the acquisition of these
items by terrorists. The Wassenaar Arrangement is the first multilateral body
focused on export controls for conventional arms and dual-use goods and
technologies, and it comprises 42 participating states spanning six continents.
It is consensus-based with decisions taken on a politically binding basis.
Contributing to international non-proliferation efforts, the Arrangement
complements and reinforces other multilateral export control regimes to
promote transparency and accountability in transfers (i.e. deliveries) of arms
and dual-use items. Wassenaar Arrangement participating states collectively
agree on the munitions and dual-use goods and technologies to be included
in both the control lists, then apply national export controls to items on these
lists with the objective of preventing unauthorized transfers or re-transfers.
All measures undertaken with respect to the Arrangement will be in
accordance with national legislation and policies and will be implemented
on the basis of national discretion. To encourage broad adoption of the
Arrangement’s standards and effective national export control systems in line
with its objectives, outreach is conducted to non-members.
Prepared by the Wassenaar Arrangement Secretariat.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 123
Background
The Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods
and Technologies (Wassenaar Arrangement) is the first multilateral body focused on export
controls for conventional arms and dual-use goods and technologies. The Arrangement was
established in 1996 as an intergovernmental forum to contribute to regional and international
security and stability by facilitating information exchange and promoting transparency and
greater responsibility in transfers (i.e. deliveries) of conventional arms and dual-use goods
and technologies. By doing so, it aims to prevent destabilizing accumulations of arms
which could adversely affect regional and international security and stability as well as the
acquisition of these items by terrorists.
The Arrangement focuses on threats to peace and security that may arise from transfers of
armaments and sensitive dual-use goods and technologies where the risks are judged greatest.
Wassenaar Arrangement participating states seek, through their national policies, to ensure
that transfers of these items do not contribute to the development or enhancement of military
capabilities that undermine these goals and are not diverted to support such capabilities.
Membership
Agreement to establish the Wassenaar Arrangement was reached in December 1995 at a
high-level meeting held in Wassenaar, the Netherlands, where it was decided to establish a
small secretariat in Vienna, Austria. The following year, the Wassenaar Arrangement started
operations after the adoption of the Initial Elements1, its main founding document, and
its 33 founding members held the inaugural plenary meeting. Since its establishment, the
Wassenaar Arrangement membership has expanded to 42 participating states (see Table 1).
The Arrangement is open, on a global and non-discriminatory basis, to prospective adherents
that fulfil the agreed criteria.2 When deciding on the eligibility of a state for participation, the
following factors, inter alia, will be taken into consideration:
(i) whether it is a producer or exporter of arms or industrial equipment respectively;
(ii) whether it has taken the Wassenaar Arrangement control lists as a reference in
its national export controls;
(iii) its non-proliferation policies and appropriate national policies, including
adherence to non-proliferation regimes and treaties;
(iv) its adherence to fully effective export controls.
The Wassenaar Arrangement is one of the five multilateral non-proliferation export control
regimes on weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, arms and dual-use
goods and technologies. Whereas other export control regimes focus on controls regarding
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, the Arrangement is mandated to
consider the risks associated with transfers of arms and dual-use goods and technologies

124 Wassenaar Arrangement
Table 1. Wassenaar Arrangement participating states
Participating states
Argentina* Hungary* Poland*
Australia* India Portugal*
Austria* Ireland* Romania*
Belgium* Italy* Russian Federation*
Bulgaria* Japan* Slovenia
Canada* Republic of Korea* Slovakia*
Croatia Latvia South Africa
Czech Republic* Lithuania Spain*
Denmark* Luxembourg* Sweden*
Estonia Malta Switzerland*
Finland* Mexico Türkiye*
France* Netherlands* Ukraine*
Germany* New Zealand* United Kingdom*
Greece* Norway* United States of America*
* Founding member.
in order to promote effective export controls worldwide. The Arrangement complements and
reinforces, without duplication, the other regimes which focus on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, as well as other internationally
recognized measures designed to promote transparency and accountability in transfers.
National implementation of Wassenaar Arrangement commitments ensures that export
controls are applied in a manner consistent with other commitments and obligations, and the
Initial Elements stipulate that the Arrangement “will not impede bona fide civil transactions”.
In addition to interacting regularly with relevant international and regional organizations
engaged in related activities, the Arrangement maintains informal expert-level contacts with
the other regimes on technical export control list matters.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 125
Structure
The Wassenaar Arrangement is a multilateral forum in which all decisions are taken by
consensus. Deliberations are also kept in strict confidence. The Arrangement’s main
governance and decision-making body is the Plenary, which is composed of representatives
of all participating states and normally meets once a year, usually in December. The Plenary
Chair position is subject to annual rotation among participating states. In 2023, India
succeeded Ireland as Plenary Chair of the Wassenaar Arrangement.
The Plenary establishes subsidiary bodies to prepare recommendations for Plenary
decisions and when necessary calls ad hoc meetings to discuss issues relating to the
Arrangement’s functioning. The main subsidiary bodies meet periodically throughout the
year and include: the General Working Group, which deals with policy-related matters; the
Experts Group, which addresses issues relating to the lists of controlled items; and the
Licensing and Enforcement Officers Meeting, a forum for information-sharing on practical
implementation issues. The Secretariat in Vienna supports the participating states in the
Arrangement’s functioning.
Scope of export-related measures
Participating states agree on the conventional arms, dual-use goods and technologies to
be included in both the control lists of the Wassenaar Arrangement: the Munitions List; and
the List of Dual-Use Goods and Technologies (both publicly available on the Arrangement’s
website3). They then apply national export controls to items on these lists with the objective
of preventing unauthorized transfers or re-transfers. The decision to approve or deny the
transfer of any item is the sole responsibility of each participating state on the basis of
national discretion.
Representatives of Wassenaar Arrangement participating states meet regularly in Vienna
to exchange information on risks associated with transfers of arms and dual-use goods and
technologies. Participating states have agreed to a number of guidelines, elements, best
practice documents and procedures as a basis for decision-making through the application
of their own national legislation and policies.
The Arrangement is also intended to enhance cooperation to prevent the acquisition of arms
and sensitive dual-use items for military end-uses if the situation in a region or the behaviour
of a state is, or becomes, cause for serious concern for participating states. However, as
laid out in the Initial Elements, the Arrangement is not directed against any state or group of
states. In addition, it does not interfere with the rights of states to acquire legitimate means
for self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.

126 Wassenaar Arrangement
Export controls and their implementation
Wassenaar Arrangement participating states have agreed to maintain national export controls
on items included in the control lists, which are updated on an annual basis. A summary of
changes to the lists is also published annually on the Arrangement’s website.4
Export controls are measures undertaken by governments to ensure that transfers of
strategically sensitive items are properly reviewed by requiring an exporter to apply for a
licence prior to export. Licensing factors that governments may take into account include the
destination country, the security situation in its region, sensitivity of the item, the credentials
of the end-user and the specified end-use.
Controlled items include those that are considered to have significant security implications if
they were to fall into the wrong hands. The Arrangement also takes into account technological
developments in updating the lists. The scope of the lists is as follows:
• The Munitions List covers 22 categories of equipment specially designed for
military use and related software and technology, including conventional weapons,
ammunition, parts and components, and production equipment.
• The List of Dual-Use Goods and Technologies contains more than 1,000 items that
have civil applications, but may also be used for, or diverted to, the development,
production, use or enhancement of military capabilities (see Table 2).
Table 2. Categories of product in the List of Dual-Use Goods and Technologies
Category Goods and technologies
1 Special materials and related equipment
2 Materials processing
3 Electronics
4 Computers
5 Part I: Telecommunications
Part II: Information security
6 Sensors and lasers
7 Navigation and avionics
8 Marine
9 Aerospace and propulsion
Note: This list includes separate compilations of dual-use goods and technologies deemed sensitive or
very sensitive.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 127
Implementation of the control lists is the sole responsibility of each individual Wassenaar
Arrangement participating state. Although all participating states agree to apply export
controls to the goods and technologies specified in the lists, practical implementation varies
from country to country in accordance with national procedures, policies and legislation. The
National Contacts page of the Wassenaar Arrangement website5 provides further information
on export controls – and in some cases export control documentation – from the respective
national authorities of participating states.
Information exchange and reporting
To develop common understandings of transfer risks and to inform their national licence
decision-making, participating states regularly exchange information of both a general and
specific nature. Participating states share, on a voluntary basis, national experiences and
information that enhance transparency, lead to discussions among all participating states
on arms transfers, as well as on sensitive dual-use goods and technologies, and assist in
promoting consistency within the Arrangement by developing common understandings of
associated transfer risks. On the basis of this information, participating states assess the
scope for coordinating national control policies to combat these risks.
Information exchanged includes any matters that participating states wish to bring to the
attention of others, including notifications going beyond those agreed upon. Possible
elements of general information exchange on non-participating states, pursuant to the
purposes of the Arrangement, can include acquisition/arms brokering activities, sensitive
end-users, trade in critical goods and technology, diversion activities and related risks, and
projects/programmes of concern, among others.
The Arrangement’s specific information exchange is based on the provisions of the Initial
Elements, which require notifications of transfers of conventional arms (battle tanks,
armoured combat vehicles, large calibre artillery systems, military aircraft/UAVs, military and
attack helicopters, warships, missiles or missile systems and small arms and light weapons)
to destinations outside the Arrangement, notifications of transfers of the most sensitive
dual-use goods and technologies to such destinations and certain instances in which a
licence for the transfer of dual-use goods and technologies to such destinations was denied.
Reporting of licences denied helps to bring to the attention of participating states transfers
that may undermine the Arrangement’s objectives. Participating states are required to submit
such reports on a six-monthly basis, and in some cases more frequently. In accordance
with the Initial Elements: “Notification of a denial will not impose an obligation on other
participating states to deny similar transfers.” Participating states also reserve the right to
request information on specific transfers through, inter alia, normal diplomatic channels.
Licensing and enforcement experts of participating states also regularly meet to share their
best practices, practical case studies and lessons learned.

128 Wassenaar Arrangement
Participating states have also agreed on a number of best practices, guidelines and procedures
covering different aspects of export control to promote common approaches. These are
available for public reference6 for use by, inter alia, other interested governments, industry and
academia. As of 2022, the 25 Wassenaar Arrangement best practice documents address
various aspects of the implementation of export controls such as prevention of destabilizing
accumulations, transit and transhipment, re-export controls, demilitarized military equipment,
intangible transfers of technology, internal compliance programmes, and end-use and end-
user controls, among others.
Outreach
Although the Arrangement does not have an observer category, it conducts diverse outreach to
inform non-participating states about its objectives and activities, encourage broad adoption
of the Arrangement’s standards and promote effective national export control systems in line
with non-proliferation norms, transparency and responsibility for transfers of conventional
arms and dual-use items. The Arrangement organizes regular collective outreach events for
interested outreach partners, as well as outreach dialogue with individual countries and,
upon invitation, bilateral outreach visits to interested countries, as agreed by the Wassenaar
Arrangement Plenary.
Other activities to raise awareness of the Arrangement’s work include seminars, workshops
and participation in international conferences with representatives from governments,
industry and academia. A number of participating states also undertake export controls-
related outreach on a national or regional basis, including by organizing events aimed at
engagement with countries in specific regions. Outreach efforts are published regularly on
the Arrangement’s website.7
Recent developments
As outlined in the Plenary Chair’s statement of December 2022,8 the Wassenaar Arrangement
continues to systematically review, update and improve its control lists to ensure their
ongoing relevance, taking into account international and regional security developments,
technological change, market trends and experience gained. New export controls introduced
in 2022 include those on supersonic flight technology and rim-driven motors for submarine
propulsion. The Arrangement has also updated existing controls regarding high-performance
computers, certain types of lasers, submunitions and grenades, aircraft ground equipment,
navigational satellite jamming equipment and inertial measurement equipment. Further, the
Arrangement updated the “Best Practices regarding Very Sensitive List Items”, the “End-User
Assurances Commonly Used – Consolidated Indicative List”, and identified other existing
guidelines for possible updating as appropriate in 2023.

WEAPONS
AND
DISARMAMENT
International export regulations and controls 129
Endnotes
1 Available at https://www.wassenaar.org/public-documents.
2 See appendix 4 to the Initial Elements, available at https://www.wassenaar.org/public-documents.
3 See https://www.wassenaar.org/control-lists.
4 See https://www.wassenaar.org/control-lists.
5 See https://www.wassenaar.org/participating-states.
6 For current best practice documents, see https://www.wassenaar.org/best-practices.
7 See https://www.wassenaar.org/outreach.
8 See https://www.wassenaar.org/blog.

130 Annex International export regulations and controls 131
Annex
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DRUGS CONTROL WEAPONS AND DISARMAMENT
WTO members
edarT lanoitanretnI
no noitnevnoC
dliW
fo seicepS
deregnadnE
ni
arolF dna
anuaF
lortnoC
eht no
noitnevnoC
lesaB
stnemevoM
yradnuobsnarT
fo
rieht
dna setsaW
suodrazaH
fo
lasopsiD
lesaB
eht
ot tnemdnemA
naB
noitnevnoC
roirP eht
no noitnevnoC
madrettoR
rof erudecorP
tnesnoC demrofnI
dna slacimehC
suodrazaH
niatreC
edarT
lanoitanretnI
ni sedicitseP
no noitnevnoC
mlohkcotS
stnatulloP
cinagrO tnetsisreP
licnuoC
eht
fo noisiceD
DCEO
yradnuobsnarT
fo lortnoC
eht
no
rof denitseD
setsaW
fo stnemevoM yrevoceR
eht rof
noitnevnoC
anneiV
reyaL
enozO
eht fo noitcetorP
secnatsbuS
no
locotorP laertnoM
reyaL
enozO
eht etelpeD
taht
citocraN
no
noitnevnoC
elgniS
1691
,sgurD
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
1791
fo secnatsbuS
tsniaga noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dna sgurD
citocraN
ni cfifarT
ticillI
8891 fo
secnatsbuS
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
krowemarF
OHW
lortnoC occaboT
ni edarT
ticillI etanimilE
ot locotorP stcudorP occaboT
noitnevnoC
snopaeW lacimehC ytaerT edarT
smrA
puorG ailartsuA
no
tnemegnarrA
raanessaW
lanoitnevnoC
rof slortnoC
tropxE
dna sdooG
esU-lauD dna
smrA
seigolonhceT
WTO members and their current status with the
selected international agreements and conventions
(as of 30 August 2023)
Afghanistan · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Albania · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Angola · · · · · · · · · ·
Antigua & Barbuda · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Argentina · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Armenia · · · · · · · · · · ·
Australia · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Austria · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Bahrain, Kingdom of · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Bangladesh · · · · · · · · · ·
Barbados · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Belgium · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Belize · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Benin · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Bolivia, Pl. State of · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Botswana · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Brazil · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Brunei Darussalam · · · · · · · · · ·

132 Annex International export regulations and controls 133
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DRUGS CONTROL WEAPONS AND DISARMAMENT
WTO members
edarT lanoitanretnI
no noitnevnoC
dliW
fo seicepS
deregnadnE
ni
arolF dna
anuaF
lortnoC
eht no
noitnevnoC
lesaB
stnemevoM
yradnuobsnarT
fo
rieht
dna setsaW
suodrazaH
fo
lasopsiD
lesaB
eht
ot tnemdnemA
naB
noitnevnoC
roirP eht
no noitnevnoC
madrettoR
rof erudecorP
tnesnoC demrofnI
dna slacimehC
suodrazaH
niatreC
edarT
lanoitanretnI
ni sedicitseP
no noitnevnoC
mlohkcotS
stnatulloP
cinagrO tnetsisreP
licnuoC
eht
fo noisiceD
DCEO
yradnuobsnarT
fo lortnoC
eht
no
rof denitseD
setsaW
fo stnemevoM yrevoceR
eht rof
noitnevnoC
anneiV
reyaL
enozO
eht fo noitcetorP
secnatsbuS
no
locotorP laertnoM
reyaL
enozO
eht etelpeD
taht
citocraN
no
noitnevnoC
elgniS
1691
,sgurD
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
1791
fo secnatsbuS
tsniaga noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dna sgurD
citocraN
ni cfifarT
ticillI
8891 fo
secnatsbuS
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
krowemarF
OHW
lortnoC occaboT
ni edarT
ticillI etanimilE
ot locotorP stcudorP occaboT
noitnevnoC
snopaeW lacimehC ytaerT edarT
smrA
puorG ailartsuA
no
tnemegnarrA
raanessaW
lanoitnevnoC
rof slortnoC
tropxE
dna sdooG
esU-lauD dna
smrA
seigolonhceT
Bulgaria · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Burkina Faso · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Burundi · · · · · · · · · · ·
Cabo Verde · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Cambodia · · · · · · · · · · ·
Cameroon · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Canada · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Central African Republic · · · · · · · · · · ·
Chad · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Chile · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
China · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Colombia · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Congo · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Costa Rica · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Côte d’Ivoire · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Croatia · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Cuba · · · · · · · · · ·
Cyprus · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Czech Republic · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Dem. Rep. of the Congo · · · · · · · · · · ·
Denmark · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Djibouti · · · · · · · · · · ·
Dominica · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Dominican Republic · · · · · · · · · · ·

134 Annex International export regulations and controls 135
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DRUGS CONTROL WEAPONS AND DISARMAMENT
WTO members
edarT lanoitanretnI
no noitnevnoC
dliW
fo seicepS
deregnadnE
ni
arolF dna
anuaF
lortnoC
eht no
noitnevnoC
lesaB
stnemevoM
yradnuobsnarT
fo
rieht
dna setsaW
suodrazaH
fo
lasopsiD
lesaB
eht
ot tnemdnemA
naB
noitnevnoC
roirP eht
no noitnevnoC
madrettoR
rof erudecorP
tnesnoC demrofnI
dna slacimehC
suodrazaH
niatreC
edarT
lanoitanretnI
ni sedicitseP
no noitnevnoC
mlohkcotS
stnatulloP
cinagrO tnetsisreP
licnuoC
eht
fo noisiceD
DCEO
yradnuobsnarT
fo lortnoC
eht
no
rof denitseD
setsaW
fo stnemevoM yrevoceR
eht rof
noitnevnoC
anneiV
reyaL
enozO
eht fo noitcetorP
secnatsbuS
no
locotorP laertnoM
reyaL
enozO
eht etelpeD
taht
citocraN
no
noitnevnoC
elgniS
1691
,sgurD
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
1791
fo secnatsbuS
tsniaga noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dna sgurD
citocraN
ni cfifarT
ticillI
8891 fo
secnatsbuS
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
krowemarF
OHW
lortnoC occaboT
ni edarT
ticillI etanimilE
ot locotorP stcudorP occaboT
noitnevnoC
snopaeW lacimehC ytaerT edarT
smrA
puorG ailartsuA
no
tnemegnarrA
raanessaW
lanoitnevnoC
rof slortnoC
tropxE
dna sdooG
esU-lauD dna
smrA
seigolonhceT
Ecuador · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Egypt · · · · · · · · · · ·
El Salvador · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Estonia · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Eswatini · · · · · · · · · · · ·
European Union · · · · · · · · · · ·
Fiji · · · · · · · · · ·
Finland · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
France · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Gabon · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
The Gambia · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Georgia · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Germany · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Ghana · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Greece · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Grenada · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Guatemala · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Guinea · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Guinea-Bissau · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Guyana · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Haiti · · · · ·
Honduras · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Hong Kong, China * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Hungary · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

136 Annex International export regulations and controls 137
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DRUGS CONTROL WEAPONS AND DISARMAMENT
WTO members
edarT lanoitanretnI
no noitnevnoC
dliW
fo seicepS
deregnadnE
ni
arolF dna
anuaF
lortnoC
eht no
noitnevnoC
lesaB
stnemevoM
yradnuobsnarT
fo
rieht
dna setsaW
suodrazaH
fo
lasopsiD
lesaB
eht
ot tnemdnemA
naB
noitnevnoC
roirP eht
no noitnevnoC
madrettoR
rof erudecorP
tnesnoC demrofnI
dna slacimehC
suodrazaH
niatreC
edarT
lanoitanretnI
ni sedicitseP
no noitnevnoC
mlohkcotS
stnatulloP
cinagrO tnetsisreP
licnuoC
eht
fo noisiceD
DCEO
yradnuobsnarT
fo lortnoC
eht
no
rof denitseD
setsaW
fo stnemevoM yrevoceR
eht rof
noitnevnoC
anneiV
reyaL
enozO
eht fo noitcetorP
secnatsbuS
no
locotorP laertnoM
reyaL
enozO
eht etelpeD
taht
citocraN
no
noitnevnoC
elgniS
1691
,sgurD
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
1791
fo secnatsbuS
tsniaga noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dna sgurD
citocraN
ni cfifarT
ticillI
8891 fo
secnatsbuS
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
krowemarF
OHW
lortnoC occaboT
ni edarT
ticillI etanimilE
ot locotorP stcudorP occaboT
noitnevnoC
snopaeW lacimehC ytaerT edarT
smrA
puorG ailartsuA
no
tnemegnarrA
raanessaW
lanoitnevnoC
rof slortnoC
tropxE
dna sdooG
esU-lauD dna
smrA
seigolonhceT
Iceland · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
India · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Indonesia · · · · · · · · · · ·
Ireland · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Israel · · · · · · · · · ·
Italy · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Jamaica · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Japan · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Jordan · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Kazakhstan · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Kenya · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Korea, Republic of · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Kuwait, the State of · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Kyrgyz Republic · · · · · · · · · · ·
Lao People’s Dem. Rep. · · · · · · · · · · ·
Latvia · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Lesotho · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Liberia · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Liechtenstein · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Lithuania · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Luxembourg · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Macao, China * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Madagascar · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Malawi · · · · · · · · · · ·

138 Annex International export regulations and controls 139
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DRUGS CONTROL WEAPONS AND DISARMAMENT
WTO members
edarT lanoitanretnI
no noitnevnoC
dliW
fo seicepS
deregnadnE
ni
arolF dna
anuaF
lortnoC
eht no
noitnevnoC
lesaB
stnemevoM
yradnuobsnarT
fo
rieht
dna setsaW
suodrazaH
fo
lasopsiD
lesaB
eht
ot tnemdnemA
naB
noitnevnoC
roirP eht
no noitnevnoC
madrettoR
rof erudecorP
tnesnoC demrofnI
dna slacimehC
suodrazaH
niatreC
edarT
lanoitanretnI
ni sedicitseP
no noitnevnoC
mlohkcotS
stnatulloP
cinagrO tnetsisreP
licnuoC
eht
fo noisiceD
DCEO
yradnuobsnarT
fo lortnoC
eht
no
rof denitseD
setsaW
fo stnemevoM yrevoceR
eht rof
noitnevnoC
anneiV
reyaL
enozO
eht fo noitcetorP
secnatsbuS
no
locotorP laertnoM
reyaL
enozO
eht etelpeD
taht
citocraN
no
noitnevnoC
elgniS
1691
,sgurD
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
1791
fo secnatsbuS
tsniaga noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dna sgurD
citocraN
ni cfifarT
ticillI
8891 fo
secnatsbuS
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
krowemarF
OHW
lortnoC occaboT
ni edarT
ticillI etanimilE
ot locotorP stcudorP occaboT
noitnevnoC
snopaeW lacimehC ytaerT edarT
smrA
puorG ailartsuA
no
tnemegnarrA
raanessaW
lanoitnevnoC
rof slortnoC
tropxE
dna sdooG
esU-lauD dna
smrA
seigolonhceT
Malaysia · · · · · · · · · · ·
Maldives · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Mali · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Malta · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Mauritania · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Mauritius · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Mexico · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Moldova, Republic of · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Mongolia · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Montenegro · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Morocco · · · · · · · · · · ·
Mozambique · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Myanmar · · · · · · · · · ·
Namibia · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Nepal · · · · · · · · · · ·
Netherlands · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
New Zealand · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Nicaragua · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Niger · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Nigeria · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
North Macedonia · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Norway · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Oman · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Pakistan · · · · · · · · · · · ·

140 Annex International export regulations and controls 141
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DRUGS CONTROL WEAPONS AND DISARMAMENT
WTO members
edarT lanoitanretnI
no noitnevnoC
dliW
fo seicepS
deregnadnE
ni
arolF dna
anuaF
lortnoC
eht no
noitnevnoC
lesaB
stnemevoM
yradnuobsnarT
fo
rieht
dna setsaW
suodrazaH
fo
lasopsiD
lesaB
eht
ot tnemdnemA
naB
noitnevnoC
roirP eht
no noitnevnoC
madrettoR
rof erudecorP
tnesnoC demrofnI
dna slacimehC
suodrazaH
niatreC
edarT
lanoitanretnI
ni sedicitseP
no noitnevnoC
mlohkcotS
stnatulloP
cinagrO tnetsisreP
licnuoC
eht
fo noisiceD
DCEO
yradnuobsnarT
fo lortnoC
eht
no
rof denitseD
setsaW
fo stnemevoM yrevoceR
eht rof
noitnevnoC
anneiV
reyaL
enozO
eht fo noitcetorP
secnatsbuS
no
locotorP laertnoM
reyaL
enozO
eht etelpeD
taht
citocraN
no
noitnevnoC
elgniS
1691
,sgurD
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
1791
fo secnatsbuS
tsniaga noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dna sgurD
citocraN
ni cfifarT
ticillI
8891 fo
secnatsbuS
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
krowemarF
OHW
lortnoC occaboT
ni edarT
ticillI etanimilE
ot locotorP stcudorP occaboT
noitnevnoC
snopaeW lacimehC ytaerT edarT
smrA
puorG ailartsuA
no
tnemegnarrA
raanessaW
lanoitnevnoC
rof slortnoC
tropxE
dna sdooG
esU-lauD dna
smrA
seigolonhceT
Panama · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Papua New Guinea · · · · · · · · ·
Paraguay · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Peru · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Philippines · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Poland · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Portugal · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Qatar · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Romania · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Russian Federation · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Rwanda · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Saint Kitts & Nevis · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Saint Lucia · · · · · · · · · · · ·
St Vincent & the Grenadines · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Samoa · · · · · · · · · · ·
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Senegal · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Seychelles · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Sierra Leone · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Singapore · · · · · · · · · · ·
Slovak Republic · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Slovenia · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Solomon Islands · · · · · · · ·
South Africa · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

142 Annex International export regulations and controls 143
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DRUGS CONTROL WEAPONS AND DISARMAMENT
WTO members
edarT lanoitanretnI
no noitnevnoC
dliW
fo seicepS
deregnadnE
ni
arolF dna
anuaF
lortnoC
eht no
noitnevnoC
lesaB
stnemevoM
yradnuobsnarT
fo
rieht
dna setsaW
suodrazaH
fo
lasopsiD
lesaB
eht
ot tnemdnemA
naB
noitnevnoC
roirP eht
no noitnevnoC
madrettoR
rof erudecorP
tnesnoC demrofnI
dna slacimehC
suodrazaH
niatreC
edarT
lanoitanretnI
ni sedicitseP
no noitnevnoC
mlohkcotS
stnatulloP
cinagrO tnetsisreP
licnuoC
eht
fo noisiceD
DCEO
yradnuobsnarT
fo lortnoC
eht
no
rof denitseD
setsaW
fo stnemevoM yrevoceR
eht rof
noitnevnoC
anneiV
reyaL
enozO
eht fo noitcetorP
secnatsbuS
no
locotorP laertnoM
reyaL
enozO
eht etelpeD
taht
citocraN
no
noitnevnoC
elgniS
1691
,sgurD
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
1791
fo secnatsbuS
tsniaga noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dna sgurD
citocraN
ni cfifarT
ticillI
8891 fo
secnatsbuS
ciportohcysP
no noitnevnoC
krowemarF
OHW
lortnoC occaboT
ni edarT
ticillI etanimilE
ot locotorP stcudorP occaboT
noitnevnoC
snopaeW lacimehC ytaerT edarT
smrA
puorG ailartsuA
no
tnemegnarrA
raanessaW
lanoitnevnoC
rof slortnoC
tropxE
dna sdooG
esU-lauD dna
smrA
seigolonhceT
Spain · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Sri Lanka · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Suriname · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Sweden · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Switzerland · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Chinese Taipei
Tajikistan · · · · · · · · · ·
Tanzania · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Thailand · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Togo · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Tonga · · · · · · · · · · ·
Trinidad & Tobago · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Tunisia · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Türkiye · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Uganda · · · · · · · · · · ·
Ukraine · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
United Arab Emirates · · · · · · · · · · ·
United Kingdom · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
United States · · · · · · · · · ·
Uruguay · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Vanuatu · · · · · · · · ·
Venezuela, Bol. Rep. of · · · · · · · · · · ·
Viet Nam · · · · · · · · · · ·
Yemen · · · · · · · · · · ·
Zambia · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Zimbabwe · · · · · · · · · · ·
* The relevant agreement or convention has been notified as applicable to this separate customs territory.

144 Abbreviations
Abbreviations
ATT Arms Trade Treaty
Ban Amendment Amendment to the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
Their Disposal
Basel Convention Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements
of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal
BRS Conventions Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
BWC Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction
CFCs chlorofluorocarbons
CITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora
CND Commission on Narcotic Drugs
CoP Conference of the Parties
CSP Conference of (the) States Parties
CWC Chemical Weapons Convention
ECOSOC United Nations Economic and Social Council
ESM environmentally sound management
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
HFCs hydrofluorocarbons
HS Harmonized System
INCB International Narcotics Control Board
MEA multilateral environmental agreements
Montreal Protocol Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer

International export regulations and controls 145
MoP Meeting of the Parties
ODS ozone-depleting substance
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPCW Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
PEN Online Pre-Export Notification Online
PIC prior informed consent
POP persistent organic pollutant
QR quantitative restriction
QR Decision Decision on Notification Procedures for Quantitative Restrictions
Rotterdam Convention Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent
Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides
in International Trade
Stockholm Convention Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants
TRIM trade-related investment measure
TRIMs Agreement Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures
Vienna Convention Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer
WGETI Working Group on Effective Treaty Implementation
WHO World Health Organization
WHO FCTC WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
WMD weapons of mass destruction
WTO Agreement 1994 Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization

146 Bibliography
Bibliography
Clapham, A., Casey-Maslen, S., Giacca, G., Parker, S. (2016), “The Title of the Treaty”,
The Arms Trade Treaty: A Commentary, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goodchild, M., Nargis, N. and Tursan d'Espaignet, E. (2018), “Global Economic Cost of
Smoking-attributable Diseases”, Tobacco Control 27: 58-64.
Goode, W. (2007), Dictionary of Trade Policy Terms, 5th edition, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) (2021), Lessons from Countries and
Humanitarian Aid Organizations in Facilitating the Timely Supply of Controlled Substances
during Emergency Situations, Vienna: INCB.
Nellemann, C., Henriksen, R., Kreilhuber, A., Stewart, D., Kotsovou, M., Raxter, P., Mrema,
E. and Barrat, S. (2016), The Rise of Environmental Crime: A Growing Threat To Natural
Resources Peace, Development and Security, Nairobi: UNEP/RHIPTO Rapid Response–
Norwegian Center for Global Analyses.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2009), Guidance
Manual for the Control of Transboundary Movements of Recoverable Wastes, Paris: OECD.
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (2022), Declarations
Handbook 2013: Revised Version 3, The Hague: OPCW.
Secretariat of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora (CITES Secretariat) (2022), World Wildlife Trade Report 2022, Geneva: CITES.
Small Arms Survey (2014), Small Arms Survey 2014: Women and Guns, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) (2013), The International Drug Control
Conventions, New York: United Nations.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) (2020), World Wildlife Crime Report
2020: Trafficking in Protected Species, New York: United Nations.
World Health Organization (WHO) (1996), Model Guidelines for the International Provision
of Controlled Medicines for Emergency Medical Care, Geneva: WHO.
World Trade Organization (WTO) and Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) (2015), CITES and the WTO: Enhancing
Cooperation for Sustainable Development, Geneva: WTO/CITES.

Print ISBN 978-92-870-7508-6
Web ISBN 978-92-870-7507-9
WTO Online Bookshop
http://onlinebookshop.wto.org
World Trade Organization
154, rue de Lausanne
CH-1211 Geneva 2
Switzerland
Tel: +41 (0)22 739 51 11
WTO Publications
Email: publications@wto.org
www.wto.org
Printed by the World Trade Organization.
© World Trade Organization 2023
Report designed by ACW, London

Measures such as prohibitions, export licences and restrictions assist in risk management
and the regulation of trade in controlled and sensitive goods. They are established pursuant
to international agreements and conventions on protecting people and the environment, on
controlling drugs and harmful substances, and on contributing to international peace and
weapons controls. This publication explores how particular international agreements and
conventions operate in practice and how they link to the multilateral trading system.
Prepared or reviewed by the secretariats and implementing bodies of the relevant international
agreements and conventions, the chapters delve into the export-related controls covered
by these legal instruments and how these restrictions tie in with WTO agreements. The
agreements and conventions included in this publication were selected on the basis of three
criteria: the presence of provisions in the agreement or convention that seek to regulate
exports; the extent to which WTO members are party to those provisions; and how often
members refer to them in their notifications submitted to the WTO Secretariat.
The aim of the publication is to provide a better understanding of how international
agreements and conventions regulate the export of high-risk and controlled goods and how
these regulations co-exist with WTO rules.

