

=== Const.ofCameroon2008.pdf ===

The Constitution
of the Republic of
La Constitution de la
� Cameroon
Republique du
Cameroun
�
�
�
Revisedandupdated.April,2008
1
Revised and updated April, 2008
�
�

public authorities. It shall:
- examine appeals on regional and council election
disputes;
- give final rulings on appeals against final
judgements passed by lower courts in cases of
administrative
Tdihsipsu bteoso;k let was printed for free distribution by
A- efxriacma Aingee, nadnay aost hpearr td iosfp tuhtee sC eaxmpererossolny Idnefvoormlvaintigo n
aunpdo nE idtu bcya tliaown .D ay (CIED).
Article 41
To test your knowledge about this constitution,
The audit bench shall be competent to control and
please see the suggested study questions that are
rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public
included in the middle sections of this booklet.
and semi-public enterprises.
It shall:
To learn more about Africa Agenda and CIED, go to
- give final rulings on final judgements passed lower
audit courts;
Website: www.AfricaAgenda.org or
- examine any other matters expressly devolving
Email: offi ce@AfricaAgenda.org
upon it by law.
This version of the constitution was revised, modifi ed
Article 42
and updated pursuant to the below Cameroon law.
(1) The organization, functioning, composition and
duties of the Supreme Court and the benches it
Lcoamwp Nri°s e2s0, 0th8e/0 c0o1n odfi t1io4n As pforirl r2e0fe0r8r itnog a mmaetntedr as ntod
sthuepmpl eams wenetl ls oams teh ep rporvoicseiodnusr eo fa plapwli cNab° l9e6 b/6ef oofr e1 8them
Jsahnaulla brye l1a9id9 6d otow anm beyn dla wth.e Constitution of 2 June
1(29)7 T2.he organization, functioning, composition and
duties of the Courts of Appeal and judicial,
2

pCubolnics taiuttuhotiroitnie so. fIt tshheal lR: epublic of Cameroon
- examine appeals on regional and council election
dPiRspEuAteMs; BLE
- give final rulings on appeals against final
jWudeg, ethmee pnetso pplaes soefd C baym leorwoeorn c, ourts in cases of
administrative
dPirsopuudteso;f our linguistic and cultural diversity, an
-e enxriacmhiinnge ,f aenatyu oreth oefr oduisr pnuatteiso neaxlp irdeesnsltyit yd,e bvuotl ving
upproofno iut nbdyl yl aaww.a re of the imperative need to further
consolidate our unity, solemnly declare that we
Acortnicstliet u4t1e one and the same Nation, bound by the,
Tsahme ea uddeistt ibneyn,c ahn sdh aaslls ebret cooumr fpiermte,n dt etote crmonintraotli oann dto
rbuuleil do nth peu Cblaimc earcocoonuinatns ,F aast hweerllla nads oonn tthhoes bea osfis p oufb tlhice
aidneda slse mofi -fpruabtelricn ietyn,t ejurpsrtiicsees a. nd progress;
It shall:
-J geaivloe ufsinoafl oruulri nhgasrd o-nw foinn ailn djuedpgeenmdeennctse paansds ereds loolwveedr
atou dpirt ecsoeurvrtes ;s ame; convinced that the salvation of
-A efxraicma ilniees a inny f ootrhgeinr gm eavtteerr-sg reoxwpriensgs lbyo dnedvso olfv ing
uspoolind airt ibtyy alamwo.n g African Peoples, affirm our desire
to contribute to the advent of a united and free Africa,
Awrhtiiclele m 4a2i ntaining peaceful and brotherly relations
(w1)it Th hthee o orgthaenri znaattiioonn,s f uonf cthtieo nWinogr,l dc,o imn paocsciotirodna nacned
dwuittihe st hoef pthrien Sciupplreesm ene sChoriunretd a nind tthhee Cbhenarctheer so ift the
cUonmitperdis Nesa,t tihoen sc;o nditions for referring matters to
them as well as the procedure applicable before them
shall be laid down by law.
(2) The organization, functioning, composition and
3
duties of the Courts of Appeal and judicial,
3

pRuebsloilcv aeudt htoo rhiatirense. sIst oshuar lnl:a tural resources in order to - freedom and security shall be guaranteed to each
-e nesxuarme itnhee awpeplel-ablse ionng roefg eiovnearyl acnitdi zceonu wnciitlh eoluetc tion individual, subject to respect for the rights of others
ddiisspcruitmesi;n ation, by raising living standards, proclaim and the higher interests of the State;
-o ugriv reig fhint atol rduelvineglos pomn eanptp aesa lws ealgl aaisn sotu fri ndaelt ermination - every person shall have the right to settle in any
jtuod dgeevmoeten tasl lp oaussr eedf fboyrt lso two etrh acto eunrtds ainn dc adseecsl aorfe our place and to move about freely, subject to the
aredamdiinniesstsr attoiv ceo -operate with all States desirous of statutory provisions concerning public law and order,
dpiasrptiuctiepsa;t ing in this national endeavour with due security and tranquillity;
-r eesxpaemcti nfoer, aonuyr soothveerr ediigsnptuyt easn dex tphree isnsdlye pdeenvdoelvnicneg o f - the home is inviolate. No search may be conducted
uthpeo Cn aitm beyr olaowni.a n State. except by virtue of the law;
- the privacy of all correspondence is inviolate. No
AWreti,c plee o4p1l e of Cameroon, interference may be allowed except by virtue of
TDheec laaurdeitth baet ntchhe shhuamlla bne p ceorsmopne, twenitth toou cto dnitsrtoinl catniodn as decisions emanating from the Judicial Power;
rtou lrea ocen, preulbigliico anc, csoeuxn otrs ,b aesl iwefe, lpl oasss oenss tehso isnea loife npaubblleic - no person may be compelled to do what the law
aanndd sseamcrie-dp uribglhict se; nterprises. does not prescribe;
It shall: - no person may be prosecuted, arrested or detained
-A gffiivrme foinuarl artutalicnhgms eonnt ftion athl ej ufdugnedmamenetnst apla fsrseeedd loomwse r except in the cases and according to the manner
aeundshitr icnoeudr tisn; the Universal Declaration of Human determined by law;
-R eigxhatms,i nthee a Cnyh aorttheer ro mf tahttee rUsn eixtepdr eNssaltyio dnesv aonlvdi nTgh e - the law may not have retrospective effect. No
uApforinc aitn b Cyh laarwte.r on Human and Peoples' Rights, and person may be judged and punished, except by virtue
all duly ratified international conventions relating of a law enacted and published before the offence
Athretricelteo ,4 i2n particular, to the following principles: committed;
(1) The organization, functioning, composition and - The law shall ensure the right of every person to a
d- uatlile pse orfs othnes sShuaplrl ehmave eC eoquurat la rnidg htthse a bnedn ochbelisg aitt ions. fair hearing before the courts;
cTohme pSrtiastees ,s hthaell cpornodviitdioe nasl lf iotrs rceiftiezrerinnsg w mitaht ttehres to - every accused person is presumed innocent until
tchoenmdi atiso nwse nlle acse sthsaer yp rfoocre tdhuerier dapevpelilcoapbmlee bnet;f ore them found guilty during a hearing conducted in strict
s- hthalel Sbtea ltaei sdh daollw enn sbuyr el atwhe. protection of minorities compliance with the rights of defence;
(a2n)d T shhea lol rpgraensiezravteio tnh,e f ruingchttiso onfin ign,d cigoemnpooussi tion and - every person has a right to life, to physical and
dpuotpiuesla otifo tnhse i Cn oauccrtosr odfa nAcpep weaitlh a tnhde jluadwic; ial, moral integrity and to humane treatment in all
circumstances. Under no circumstances shall any
4 5
4

Resolved to harness our natural resources in order to p- ufrbeleicd oamut haonrdit sieesc.u Irti tsyh aslhla: ll be guaranteed to each
ensure the well-being of every citizen without -in edxiavmidiunael ,a spupbejaelcst oton rreesgpioencta lf oarn dth ceo ruignhctisl eolfe octtihoenr s
discrimination, by raising living standards, proclaim danisdp uthtees h; igher interests of the State;
our right to development as well as our determination -- geviveer yf ipnearls rounl isnhgasl lo hna avpep tehael sr iagghati ntos ts feitntlael in any
to devote all our efforts to that end and declare our jpuldacgee manedn ttso pmasosveed abbyo ulot wfreere clyo,u srutsb ijnec ct atsoe tsh oef
readiness to co-operate with all States desirous of astdamtuitnoirsytr patriovvei sions concerning public law and order,
participating in this national endeavour with due dseiscpuuritteys ;a nd tranquillity;
respect for our sovereignty and the independence of -- ethxea mhoinmee, aisn yin ovtihoelart de.i sNpuot seesa erxcphr mesasyly b dee cvoonlvdiuncgte d
the Cameroonian State. uexpcoenp itt bbyy vlairwtu.e of the law;
- the privacy of all correspondence is inviolate. No
We, people of Cameroon, Ainrtteircfleer e4n1c e may be allowed except by virtue of
Declarethat the human person, without distinction as Tdehcei saiuodnist ebmenacnha tsihnagl lf rboem c othmep Jeutdenicti atol Pcoonwteror;l and
to race, religion, sex or belief, possesses inalienable r-u nloe opner psounb lmica ayc cboeu cnotms, paesl lwedel tlo a sd oo nw thhaots teh oe fl apwub lic
and sacred rights; adnode ss enmoti -ppruesbclircib een; terprises.
I-t n soh aplel:r son may be prosecuted, arrested or detained
Affirmour attachment to the fundamental freedoms -e xgcivepe tf iinn atlh reu cliansgess oann df iancacl ojruddignegm toe nthtse p masasnende rlo wer
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human aduedteirt mcoinuerdts ;b y law;
Rights, the Charter of the United Nations and The -- ethxea mlaiwn em aanyy nootht ehra vmea rtteetrrso sepxepcrteivssel ye fdfeecvto. lNvion g
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, and upperosno nit mbya yla bwe. judged and punished, except by virtue
all duly ratified international conventions relating of a law enacted and published before the offence
thereto, in particular, to the following principles: Acormticmlei t4te2d ;
(-1 T) hTeh lea wor gshaanlilz eantisounr,e f uthnec triiognhitn ogf, ecvoemryp opseirtisoonn aton da
- all persons shall have equal rights and obligations. dfauitri ehse aorfi nthge b Seufoprree mthee Ccoouurrtts a; nd the benches it
The State shall provide all its citizens with the c- oemveprryi saecsc, uthseed c opnerdsiotino niss pforers ruemfeerdri ningn mocaettnetr us ntoti l
conditions necessary for their development; tfhoeumnd a gs uwiletyll daus rtihneg par ohceeadriunrge caopnpdliuccatbelde ibne sfotrriec tt hem
- the State shall ensure the protection of minorities schoamllp bliea nlacied wdiotwh nth bey r ilgahwts. of defence;
and shall preserve the rights of indigenous (-2 e)v Terhye poerrgsaonni zhaatsio an ,r ifguhntc ttoio lnifien,g t,o c pohmypsoicsaitli oann da nd
populations in accordance with the law; dmuotrieasl ionft ethgeri tCyo aunrdts toof hAupmpaenael atrneda tjmudeincti ainl, all
circumstances. Under no circumstances shall any
4 5
5

ppeurbsloicn abuet hsourbijteiecste. dIt tsoh taollr:t ure, to cruel, inhumane or be prejudicial to the security, freedom, existence or
-d eegxraamdiinnge atrpepaetmales notn; regional and council election property of other persons;
d- insop upteerss;o n shall be harassed on grounds of his - every person shall have a right to a healthy
-o rgiigvien ,f irnealilg riuoluisn,g psh oinlo asopppheaiclsa la ogra ipnoslti tfiicnaall opinions environment. The protection of the environment shall
jourd bgeelmieefsn,t ss upbajsescetd t ob yre lsopwecetr fcooru prtusb ilnic c paoselisc yo;f be the duty of every citizen. The State shall ensure
a- dthmei nSitsattrea tsihvael l be secular. The neutrality and the protection and improvement of the environment;
dinidspeupteensd; ence of the State in respect of all religions - every person shall have the right and the obligation
-s heaxlal mbein geu, aarnayn toetehde;r disputes expressly devolving to work;
u- pfroene dito bmy olaf wre. ligion and worship shall be - every person shall share in the burden of public
guaranteed; expenditure according to his financial resources;
A- trhtiec lfer e4e1d om of communication, of expression, of - all citizens shall contribute to the defence of the
Tthhee p aruedssit, obfe nacshse smhballly ,b oe fc aosmsopceitaetniot nto, acnodn torof lt raandde Fatherland:
ruunlieo noins mpu, balsi cw aeclcl oaus nthtse, arisg whte tlol asstr oikne tshhoaslel obfe public - the State shall guarantee all citizens of either sex the
agnudar saenmteie-dp uubnldice re nthteer cporinsdeist.i ons fixed by law; rights and freedoms set forth in the Preamble of
I-t t shhea Nll:a tion shall protect and promote the family the Constitution.
-w ghiivceh fiisn tahle r unlaintugrsa lo fno fuinndaal tjiuodng oefm heunmtsa pna ssosecdie ltoyw. Iet r
ashuadlilt pcrooutretcst; women, the young, the elderly and the Part One
-d iesxaabmleidn;e any other matters expressly devolving The State and Sovereignty
u- pthoen Sitt abtye slahwal.l guarantee the child's right to
education. Primary education shall be compulsory. Article one
ATrhteic olerg 4a2n ization and supervision of education at all (1) The United Republic of Cameroon shall, with
(le1v) eTlsh esh oarlgl abnei zthatei obno,u fnudnecnti odnuitnyg o,f c tohme pSotastieti;o n and effect from the date of entry into force of this law, be
d- uotwiense orsf htihpe sShuapllr emmeea nC tohuer tr iagnhdt gthuea rbaenntcehedes t oit every known as Republic of Cameroon (Law No 84-1 of 4
cpoemrsopnri sbeys ,l athwe tcoo unsdei,t ieonnjso fyo ar nrdef deirsrpinogs em oaft ters to February 1984).
tphreompe artsy w. Nelol apse rtshoen p srohcaelld buer ed aeppprilviceadb tlhee breeofof,r es athveem (2) The Republic of Cameroon shall be a
sfohra lpl ubbel ilca ipdu drpoowsne sb ayn lda wsu. bject to the payment of decentralized unitary State.
(c2o)m Tpheen soartgioanni zuantdioenr ,c founndcittiioonnisn dge, tceormmipnoesdi tbioyn l aawnd; It shall be one and indivisible, secular, democratic
d- uthtiee sr iogfh tt hoef Cowounretrss ohfi pA mppaeya nl oatn bde j uedxiecricails,e d in and dedicated to social service.
violation of the public interest or in such a way as to
6 7
6

person be subjected to torture, to cruel, inhumane or pbue bplriecj uaudtihcioarli ttioe st.h Iet ssehcaullr:i ty, freedom, existence or
degrading treatment; -p reoxpaemrtiyn eo fa poptheearl sp oenrs roengsi;o nal and council election
- no person shall be harassed on grounds of his d- iesvpeurtye sp; erson shall have a right to a healthy
origin, religious, philosophical or political opinions -e ngvivireo fnimnaeln rtu. lTinhges p orno taepcptieoanl so af gthaein esnt vfiinroanl ment shall
or beliefs, subject to respect for public policy; jbued tgheem deunttys opfa essveedry b cyi tliozwene.r Tcohue rStst aitne csahsaelsl eonf sure
- the State shall be secular. The neutrality and athdem pirnoistetrcattiiovne and improvement of the environment;
independence of the State in respect of all religions d- iesvpeurtye sp; erson shall have the right and the obligation
shall be guaranteed; -to e xwaomrkin; e, any other disputes expressly devolving
- freedom of religion and worship shall be u- peovner iyt bpyer lsaown .s hall share in the burden of public
guaranteed; expenditure according to his financial resources;
- the freedom of communication, of expression, of A- artlilc cleit i4z1e ns shall contribute to the defence of the
the press, of assembly, of association, and of trade TFahteh earuldaintd b:e nch shall be competent to control and
unionism, as well as the right to strike shall be r-u tlhee o Snt aptue bslhica lal cgcuoaurnatnst,e aes a wll eclilt iazse onns othf oesieth oefr pseuxb ltihce
guaranteed under the conditions fixed by law; aringdh tsse amnid-p furebelidco emnste sreptr ifsoersth. in the Preamble of
- the Nation shall protect and promote the family Itht es hCaolln: stitution.
which is the natural foundation of human society. It - give final rulings on final judgements passed lower
shall protect women, the young, the elderly and the aPuadritt Oconuer ts;
disabled; -T hexe aSmtaintee aanndy Soothveerr emiganttteyr s expressly devolving
- the State shall guarantee the child's right to upon it by law.
education. Primary education shall be compulsory. Article one
The organization and supervision of education at all A(1r)t iTclhee 4 U2n ited Republic of Cameroon shall, with
levels shall be the bounden duty of the State; (e1ff)e Tcth fer oomrg athneiz dataitoen o, ff uennctrtyio innitnog f, ocrocme poof stihtiiso nla awn,d b e
- ownership shall mean the right guaranteed to every dkuntoiwesn o afs t hRee pSuubplriecm oef CCoamuret raonodn t(hLea bwe nNcoh e8s4 i-t1 of 4
person by law to use, enjoy and dispose of cFoembrpurairsye s1, 9th8e4 )c. onditions for referring matters to
property. No person shall be deprived thereof, save t(h2e) mT haes Rweepllu absl itch oef p Croacmeedruoroen a pshpalilcl abbel ea before them
for public purposes and subject to the payment of sdheacleln btrea llaizided d uonwinta bryy Slatawte. .
compensation under conditions determined by law; (I2t )s hTahlle boer goannei zaantdio inn,d fiuvniscitbiolen, isnegc,u cloarm, pdoesmitoiocnra atincd
- the right of ownership may not be exercised in danudti edse odfic tahtee dC toou srtosc oiafl Aseprpveicael .a nd judicial,
violation of the public interest or in such a way as to
6 7
7

pItu sbhliacl la ruetchoogrnitiizees .a Int ds hparlolt:e ct traditional values that
-c oenxfaomrmin eto a pdpemeaolsc roanti cre pgriionncailp laensd, hcuomunacni lr eiglehctsti oannd
dthisep luatwes. ;
-I tg sihvael lf iennaslu rruel itnhges e oqnu aalpitpye aolfs aalgl aciintiszte fnisn able fore the
jluawdg.ements passed by lower courts in cases of
a(3d)m Tinhies torafftiicviea l languages of the Republic of
dCiasmpuetreoso; n shall be English and French, both
-la enxgaumaginees, haanvyi nogth tehre d siasmpuet essta etuxsp.r eTshsely S dtaetveo slhvainllg
ugpuoarna intt ebey tlhaew p. romotion of bilingualism throughout
the country.
AItr stihcallel 4e1n deavour to protect and promote national
Tlahneg uauagdeits .b ench shall be competent to control and
r(u4l)e I tosn m poutbtoli cs haaclclo buen "tsP, eaasc we-eWll oarsk o-Fna tthhoesrlea nodf "p.u blic
a(5n)d Istse mflia-gp ushbalilcl bene ttehrrpereis eeqs.u al vertical stripes of
Igtr seheanl,l :r ed and yellow charged with one gold star in
-th gei vcee nfitnrea lo rfu tlhine grse do nst friinpael. judgements passed lower
a(6u)d iItt sc onuatritos;n al anthem shall be "O Cameroon, Cradle
-o fe xoaumr Finoer eafnayth oetrhse"r. matters expressly devolving
u(7p)o Tn hite bsye alla wof. the Republic of Cameroon shall be a
circular medallion in bas-relief, 46 millimetres in
Adiratmicleet e4r2, bearing on the obverse and in the centre the
(h1e)a Td hoef ogrirgla inni zpartoiofinle, ftuunrncetido ntoin tgh,e c doemxpteors tiotiwona radnsd
da uctoiefsfe oef btrhaen Schu pwreitmh et wCoo ulerat vaensd atnhde bfleannckheeds oitn the
csionmispterirs besy, ftihvee ccooncdoiati opnosd sf,o wr riethfe trhrein Fgr emnacthte wrso trod s
t“hReemp uabs lwiqeulel adsu tChea mpreorcoeudnu"r ein aspcrpilbiceadb blee lboewfo trhee t hem
suhpaplel rb eed lgaeid a dnodw thne b nya ltaiown.a l motto "Paix-Travail-
(P2a)t rTieh"e ionrsgcarinbiezdat aiobno,v feu tnhcet iloonwinegr ,e cdogme;p oonsi tthioen r eavnedr se
danudti eisn othf et hcee nCtoreu rtthse o cfo Aatp opfe aalr mansd o jfu tdhiec iRale,p ublic of
8
8

It shall recognize and protect traditional values that Cpuabmliecr oaounth, owriitthie sth. eIt E snhgallli:s h words "Republic of
conform to democratic principles, human rights and C- eaxmaemroinoen a"p ipnesaclrsib oend rbeegnioenatahl athned ucpopuenrc eild eglee catniodn t he
the law. ndaistipountaels ;m otto " Peace-Work-Fatherland " inscribed
It shall ensure the equality of all citizens before the a- bgoivvee fthinea llo rwuleirn geds goen. appeals against final
law. Tjuhdeg ceomaet notfs apramssse odf btyh el oRweepru cboliucr tosf iCn acmaseerso oonf shall
(3) The official languages of the Republic of baed manin eisstcruattcivhee on surmounted chief by the legend
Cameroon shall be English and French, both "dRiseppuutbesli;c of Cameroon" and supported by two
languages having the same status. The State shall c- reoxsasemdi nfaes, caensy w oitthhe trh dei smpouttteos "ePxeparceess-Wly odrekv-olving
guarantee the promotion of bilingualism throughout Fuaptohne rilta bnyd l"abwa.s e.
the country. The escutcheon shall be composed of a star on a field
It shall endeavour to protect and promote national vAerntitc alen d4 1tr iangle gules, charged with the
languages. gTehoeg araupdhiti cbaeln ocuht lsihnael lo bf eC caommeproeotenn at ztou rceo, natnrdo l and
(4) Its motto shall be "Peace-Work-Fatherland". sruurlec hoanr gpeudb lwici tahc tchoeu snwtso, rads awnedl ls caas loesn othf ojuses toicfe p suabblliec.
(5) Its flag shall be three equal vertical stripes of (a8n)d T sheem Ci-appuibtalilc o efn ttheer pRriespeusb. lic of Cameroon shall be
green, red and yellow charged with one gold star in YIt asohuanlld: e.
the centre of the red stripe. - give final rulings on final judgements passed lower
(6) Its national anthem shall be "O Cameroon, Cradle Aaurtdiictl ec o2u rts;
of our Forefathers". (-1 e)x Namatiinoen aaln syo ovtehreerig mntayt tsehrsa lel xbper evsessltye dd eivno tlhvei npge ople
(7) The seal of the Republic of Cameroon shall be a oufp oCna mit ebryo olanw w. ho shall exercise same either
circular medallion in bas-relief, 46 millimetres in through the President of the Republic and Members
diameter, bearing on the obverse and in the centre the oAfr tPicalreli a4m2 ent or by way of referendum. No section
head of girl in profile turned to the dexter towards o(1f )t hTeh pe eoorpglaen oizra atnioyn i,n fduinvcidtiuoanli nsgh,a lclo amrrpoogsaitteio tno aitnsde lf
a coffee branch with two leaves and flanked on the odru ttioe sh iomf stehlef Sthuep reexmerec iCseo uthrte raenodf .t he benches it
sinister by five cocoa pods, with the French words (c2o)m Tphreis aeus,t hthoeri tcioens dreitsipoonns sfiobrl er effoerr rtihneg m maantategresm toe nt of
“Republique du Cameroun" inscribed below the tthhee mSt aatse w shelall la sd ethriev ep rtohceeird uproew aeprps lfircoambl eth bee pfoeroep tlhee m
upper edge and the national motto "Paix-Travail- tshhraolul gbhe elaleidc tdioonw bny b dyi rleacwt .o r indirect universal
Patrie" inscribed above the lower edge; on the reverse s(u2f)f Trahgee ,o urgnalensizs aotitohner, wfuisnec tpioronvinidge, dc ofomrp ions tihtiiosn and
and in the centre the coat of arms of the Republic of Cduotniestsi touft itohne. Courts of Appeal and judicial,
8 9
9

(p3u)b Tlihc ea uvtohtoe rsihtiaelsl. bIte sehqaulla:l and secret, and every He shall, through his arbitration, ensure the proper
c- ietixzaemn iangee adp tpweeanlst yo ny eraergsi oannadl aabnodv ceo suhnaclli lb eel eecnttiiotlne d functioning of public authorities.
tdoi svpouttee.s ; He shall be the guarantor of the independence of the
- give final rulings on appeals against final Nation and of its territorial integrity, of the
Ajurdtigcelme 3en ts passed by lower courts in cases of permanency and continuity of the State and of the
Padomlitiinciaslt rpaatirvtiee s and groups shall help the electorate respect of international treaties and agreements.
idni stphuet emsa; king of voting decisions. They shall be
b- oeuxnamd tion er,e asnpyec ot tthheer pdriisnpcuitpelse se xopf rdeesmslyo cdreavcyo,l ving Article 6
nuaptoionn iat lb syo lvaewre. ignty and unity. They shall be formed (1) The President of the Republic shall be elected by
and shall exercise their, activities in accordance with a majority of the votes cast through direct, equal
tAhret ilcalwe .4 1 and secret universal suffrage.
The audit bench shall be competent to control and (2) The President of the Republic shall be elected for
Arurlteic olen 4p ublic accounts, as well as on those of public term of office of 7(seven) years. He shall be eligible
Santadt es epmowi-peru bshliacl le nbtee erpxreirsceiss.e d by: for re-election.
-I tT shhea lPl:r esident of the Republic; (3) The election shall be held not less than 20
-- Pgiavreli afimneanl tr.u lings on final judgements passed lower (twenty) days and not more than 50, (fifty) days
audit courts; before the expiry of the term of the President of the
P- eAxRamT iInIe any other matters expressly devolving Republic in office.
Eupxoecnu itti vbey Plaoww.e r (4) Where the office of President of the Republic
CHAPTER I becomes vacant as a result of death, resignation or
TAhrtei cPler e4s2id ent of the Republic permanent incapacity duly ascertained by the
(1) The organization, functioning, composition and Constitutional Council, the polls for the election of
Adurttiicelse o 5f the Supreme Court and the benches it the new President of the Republic must be held not
(c1o)m Tphreis Pesr,e sthidee cnot nodfi ttihoen Rs efopru brelifce rsrhinagll mbea tttheer sH toea d less than 20 (twenty) days and not more than 120
Othfe mSt aatse .w ell as the procedure applicable before them (one hundred and twenty days) after the office
(s2h)a lEl lbeec tleadid b dyo twhen wbyh olalew N. ation, he shall be the becomes vacant
s(2y)m Tbhoel oofr gnaantiiozantailo unn, iftuyn. ctioning, composition and (a) The President of the Senate shall as of right act as
Hduet isehsa ollf dthefei nCeo tuhrets p oofl iAcyp poef atlh aen nda tjiuodni.c ial, interim President of the Republic until the new
He shall ensure respect for the Constitution. President of the Republic is elected. Where the
10 11
10

(3) The vote shall be equal and secret, and every Hpueb slhica lalu, tthhororiutigehs .h Iits sahrablilt:r ation, ensure the proper
citizen aged twenty years and above shall be entitled f-u enxcatmioinnien ga popf epaulsb loinc areugthioonriatli easn. d council election
to vote. Hdies psuhtaelsl ;b e the guarantor of the independence of the
N- gaitvioen f iannadl oruf liitnsg tse rornit oarpipael ainlst eaggraitiyn,s to ffi nthael
Article 3 pjuedrmgeamneennctsy paansds ecdo nbtyi nluoiwtye ro cf othuert sS tiant ec aasneds ooff the
Political parties and groups shall help the electorate raedsmpeincits otrfa itnivteer national treaties and agreements.
in the making of voting decisions. They shall be disputes;
bound to respect the principles of democracy, A- retxicalme i6n e, any other disputes expressly devolving
national sovereignty and unity. They shall be formed (u1p)o Tnh iet bPyre lsaiwde. nt of the Republic shall be elected by
and shall exercise their, activities in accordance with a majority of the votes cast through direct, equal
the law. aAnrdti csleec r4e1t universal suffrage.
(T2h)e T ahued Pitr beseindcehn ts hoaf ltlh bee R ceopmupbelitce nsth taoll cboen etrloelc taendd f or
Article 4 treurlme oonf pouffbicliec oafc c7o(suenvtse,n a) sy weaerlsl. aHs eo nsh tahlol sbee oefl ipguibblleic
State power shall be exercised by: faonrd r see-emlei-cptiuobnl.i c enterprises.
- The President of the Republic; (I3t )s hTahlle: election shall be held not less than 20
- Parliament. (-t wgievnet yfi)n daal yrus lainngds n oont mfinoarle jtuhdagne 5m0e, n(tfsi fptya)s sdeady slo wer
bauefdoitr ec othuer tesx; piry of the term of the President of the
PART II R- eexpaumbliince i na noyf foicthe.e r matters expressly devolving
Executive Power (u4p)o Wn iht ebrye tlhawe .o ffice of President of the Republic
CHAPTER I becomes vacant as a result of death, resignation or
The President of the Republic pAerrtmicalen e4n2t incapacity duly ascertained by the
C(1o)n Tsthietu otirognaanli zCaotiuonnc,i fl,u tnhcet ipoonlilnsg f,o cro tmhep oelseitcitoionn a nofd
Article 5 tdhuet ineesw o fP trhees iSduepnrt eomf eth Ce oRuerpt uanbdli ct hme ubsetn bceh ehse lidt not
(1) The President of the Republic shall be the Head lceosms tphraisne s2,0 t h(tew ceonntdyi)t idoanyss faonrd r enfoetr rminogr em tahtatenr 1s 2to0
Of State. (thoenme h ausn wdreelld aasn tdh etw pernotcye dduaryes )a papftleicr athbele o bfefifcoer e them
(2) Elected by the whole Nation, he shall be the bsheacollm bees l aviadc adnotw n by law.
symbol of national unity. ((a2)) TThhee Porregsaindieznatt ioofn t,h feu nScetnioantei nsgh,a cllo ams poofs riitgiohnt aacntd a s
He shall define the policy of the nation. idnutteireism o Pf rtehsei dCeonut rotsf othfe A Rpeppeuabl laicn du njutidl itchiael n, ew
He shall ensure respect for the Constitution. President of the Republic is elected. Where the
10 11
11

Ppurebsliidce anut tohfo rthiteie Ss.e Inta steh ailsl :u nable to exercise his He shall be sworn in by the President of the National
p- oewxaemrsi,n teh eayp psehaallsl boen erexgeirocnisaeld a bnyd hcoisu Vnciicle e, lection Assembly.
fdoisllpouwteins;g the order of precedence. (3) The wording of the oath and the procedure for
- give final rulings on appeals against final implementing the provisions of paragraphs (1) and
(jubd) gTehme einnttse rpimas sPerde sbiyd elnotw oefr tchoeu Rrtesp iunb claics e–s tohfe (2) above shall be laid down by law.
Padremsiidneisnttr aotfiv teh e Senate or his Vice may neither (4) The office of President of the Republic shall be
admispenudte tsh; e Constitution nor the composition of the incompatible with any other elective public office or
g- oevxearmnimneen, ta.n Hy eo mthaeyr dniostp ourtegsa neixzper eas rselyfe dreenvdoulvmin ogr professional activity.
ruupno nfo irt tbhye loafwfi.c e of President of the Republic.
(c) However, where the organization of the Article 8
pArretsicidlee n4t1ia l election requires, the interim President of (1) The President of the Republic shall represent the
tThhee R aeupduitb lbiecn mcha ys,h aafltle br ec oconmsuplteatteinotn t ow ictohn tthroe l and State in all acts of public life.
Cruolen sotint uptuiobnliacl aCcocuonucnitls, ,a ams ewnedl lt haes coonm thpoosseit ioofn p oufb ltihce (2) He shall be Head of the Armed Forces.
ganodv esrenmmie-pnut. blic enterprises. (3) He shall ensure the internal and external security
It shall: of the Republic.
(-5 g)i vCea nfidniadla rtuesli nfogrs tohne foifnfaicl eju odfg Permeseindtesn pt aosfs ethde l ower (4) He shall accredit ambassadors and envoys
Rauedpiut bcloicu rmtsu; st be Cameroonian by birth, enjoy their extraordinary to foreign powers. The ambassadors
c- ievxica maninde p aonliyt iocathl erri gmhatst taenrsd emxpurset shsalyv ed eavttoalivniendg t he and envoys extraordinary of foreign powers shall be
augpeo no fi t3 b5y ( tlhawirt.y -five) by the date of the election. accredited to him.
(6) the conditions for electing the President of the (5) The President of the Republic shall enact laws as
RAretpiculbel i4c2 s hall be laid down by law. provided for in Article 31 below.
(1) The organization, functioning, composition and (6) The President of the Republic shall refer matters
Adurttiicelse o 7f the Supreme Court and the benches it to the Constitutional Council under the conditions
(c1o)m Tphreis pesre, sthidee cnot-nedleitcito nshs aflol ra rsesfuemrrein ogf fmicaet toenrsc eto h e laid down by the Constitution.
hthaesm b eaesn w sewllo arns tihne. procedure applicable before them (7) He shall exercise the right of clemency after
(s2h)a lHl eb es hlaaildl tdaokwe nth bey o laatwh .o f office before the consultation with the Higher Judicial Council.
C(2a)m Tehreo oonrgiaann ipzeaotipolne,, finu nthctei opnriensge,n ccoe mofp othseit imonem anbder s (8) He shall exercise statutory authority.
odfu tPieasrl oiafm theen tC, othuer tCs oonf sAtiptupteioanl aaln Cd ojuudnicciila al,n d the (9) He shall set up and organize the administrative
Supreme Court meeting in solemn session. services of the State.
12 13
12

President of the Senate is unable to exercise his pHueb slihca lalu btheo srwitoiersn. iInt sbhya ltlh: e President of the National
powers, they shall be exercised by his Vice, -A esxseammbinlye .a ppeals on regional and council election
following the order of precedence. d(3is)p Tuhtees w; ording of the oath and the procedure for
-im gpivleem fiennatli nrugl itnhge sp oronv aipsipoenasl so af gpaairnasgt rfaipnhasl (1) and
(b) The interim President of the Republic – the j(u2d) gaebmoveen tssh paalls sbeed l abiyd ldoowwenr cboyu lratsw i.n cases of
President of the Senate or his Vice may neither a(4d)m Tinhies torfaftiicvee of President of the Republic shall be
amend the Constitution nor the composition of the diniscpoumtepsa;t ible with any other elective public office or
government. He may not organize a referendum or -p reoxfaemssiinoen,a al nayc toivthiteyr. disputes expressly devolving
run for the office of President of the Republic. upon it by law.
(c) However, where the organization of the Article 8
presidential election requires, the interim President of A(1r)t iTclhee 4 P1r esident of the Republic shall represent the
the Republic may, after consultation with the TSthaete a iund iatl lb aecntcsh o sfh paullb bliec cliofme.p etent to control and
Constitutional Council, amend the composition of the r(u2l)e H oen sphuablll ibce a Hcceoaudn otsf, tahse wAerlml aesd oFno rthceoss.e of public
government a(3n)d H seem shi-aplul belniscu erne ttehrep riinsteesr.n al and external security
Iotf sthhael lR: epublic.
(5) Candidates for the office of President of the -( 4g)i vHee f sinhaall lr uaclicnrgesd iot na mfinbaals sjuaddogresm aenndt se pnavsosyesd lower
Republic must be Cameroonian by birth, enjoy their aeuxdtriat ocroduinrtasr;y to foreign powers. The ambassadors
civic and political rights and must have attained the -a nedx aemnvinoey sa neyx torathoerrd imnaartyte rosf efxopreriegsnsl yp odweverosl vsihnagl l be
age of 35 (thirty-five) by the date of the election. uacpcorne diti tbeyd ltaow h.i m.
(6) the conditions for electing the President of the (5) The President of the Republic shall enact laws as
Republic shall be laid down by law. Aprrotivcildee 4d2 f or in Article 31 below.
((16)) TThhee Porrgesaindieznatt ioofn ,t hfeu nRcetipounbinligc, schoamll proefseitri omna attnedrs
Article 7 dtou ttihees Cofo nthseti tSuutiporneaml eC Couonucrti la unndd tehre t hbee nccohnedsi tiito ns
(1) The president-elect shall assume office once he claoimd pdroiwsens ,b tyh eth ceo Cndointisotintsu tfioorn r. eferring matters to
has been sworn in. t(h7e) mH ea ss hwaelll le axse rthcies ep rtohcee rdiugrhet aopf pclliecmabelnec bye affotreer them
(2) He shall take the oath of office before the schoanlslu bltea ltaioidn dwoiwthn t hbey Hlaiwgh. er Judicial Council.
Cameroonian people, in the presence of the members ((28)) HThee s hoarglla enxizeartciiosne, sftuantucttoioryn ianugt,h coorimtyp.o sition and
of Parliament, the Constitutional Council and the d(9u)t iHese osfh tahlle sCeto uuprt sa nodf Aorpgpaenailz ea nthde j uaddimciianli,s trative
Supreme Court meeting in solemn session. services of the State.
12 13
13

(p1u0b)l iHc ea usthhaollr iatipepso. iInt ts thoa lcli:v il and military posts of the He shall preside over the Council of Ministers.
S- teaxtaem. ine appeals on regional and council election (2) The President of the Republic may delegate some
(d1is1p) uHtees ;s hall confer the decorations and honorary of his powers to the Prime Minister, other
d- igsitvinec ftiinoanls roufl itnhges Roenp aupbplieca.l s against final members of Government and any other senior
(ju1d2g) eTmheen Ptsr epsaidsseendt obfy tlhoew Reer pcuobulritcs mina cya, sief sn oecf essary administrative officials of the State, within the
aanddm ainftiestrr actoinvseu ltation with the Government, the framework of their respective duties.
Bdiusrpeuatuexs; of the National Assembly and the Senate, (3) Where the President of the Republic is
d- iesxsaomlvien teh, ea nNya toitohnearl dAisspsuemtesb leyx. pTrheses elyle dcetivoonl voifn ag temporarily unable to, perform his duties, he shall
nuepwon A its sbeym labwly. shall take place in accordance with delegate the Prime Minister and, should the latter also
the provisions of Article 15 (4) be unavailable, any other member of Government to
Article 41 discharge his duties within the framework of an
ATrhteic alue d9i t bench shall be competent to control and express delegation of some of his powers.
(r1u)le T ohne pPurbesliicd eanctc oouf nthtse, Rase pwueblll iacs m oany t,h woshee roef public
cainrdc usmemstia-npcuebsl isco e wntaerrrparnist,e ds.e clare by decree a state of CHAPTER II
eItm sehraglle:n cy which shall confer upon him such special The Government
p- ogwiveer sf iansa lm ruayli nbges p orno vfiidneadl jfuodrg beym leanwts. passed lower
(a2u)d Iitn ctohuer etsv;e nt of a serious threat to the nation's Article11
t-e erxriatomriinale iannteyg oritthye ro rm taot tietsr se exxisptreenscsely, idtse volving The Government shall implement the policy of the
iunpdoenp eitn bdye nlacwe o. r institutions, the President of the nation as defined by the President of the Republic.
Republic may declare a state of siege by decree and It shall be responsible to the National Assembly
tAarkteic alen y4 2m easures as he may deem necessary. He under the conditions and procedures provided for in
s(1h)a lTl hinef oorrgma nthizea Ntioatni,o fnu onfc thioisn dinegc,i scioomn pboys mitieosns aagned. Article 34 below.
duties of the Supreme Court and the benches it
Acormticplrei s1e0s , the conditions for referring matters to Article 12
(th1e) mT haes Pwreelsli daes ntht eo fp trhoec eRdeuprue balpicp lsihcaalbll aep bpeofionrte t thhee m (1) The Prime Minister shall be the Head of
Pshriamll eb Me lianiids tdeor wannd b, yo nla twhe. proposal of the latter, the Government and shall direct its action.
o(2th) eTrh me eomrgbaenrisz oatfi oGno, vfeurnncmtieonnti.n g, composition and (2) He shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
Hduet isehsa ollf dthefei nCeo tuhretsir o dfu Atipesp.e al and judicial, laws.
He shall terminate their appointment.
14 15
14

(10) He shall appoint to civil and military posts of the Hpueb slhica lalu pthreosriidtiee so.v Iet rs thhael lC: ouncil of Ministers.
State. (-2 e)x Tamhei nPer easpipdeeanlts o ofn t hree gRioenpaulb alincd m caoyu ndceille eglaetcet isoonm e
(11) He shall confer the decorations and honorary odfis hpiust epso;w ers to the Prime Minister, other
distinctions of the Republic. m- geimveb efrins aolf r Guloinvgesr nomn eanptp aenadls a angya iontshte fri nseanl ior
(12) The President of the Republic may, if necessary ajuddmgienmisetrnattsi vpea sosfefdic biayl sl oowf tehre c Soutarttes, iwn ictahsines t hoef
and after consultation with the Government, the fardammienwisotrrakt iovfe t heir respective duties.
Bureaux of the National Assembly and the Senate, (d3is) pWutheesr; e the President of the Republic is
dissolve the National Assembly. The election of a t-e emxpaomrianreil,y a unnya obtlhee tro d, ipsepruftoersm e xhpisr edsustliye sd,e hveo lsvhianlgl
new Assembly shall take place in accordance with dueploeng aitt eb tyh ela Pwr.i me Minister and, should the latter also
the provisions of Article 15 (4) be unavailable, any other member of Government to
dAirstcichlaer g4e1 his duties within the framework of an
Article 9 eTxhper easusd dite bleegnacthio snh aolfl sboem ceo mofp heitse npto two ecrosn. trol and
(1) The President of the Republic may, where rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public
circumstances so warrant, declare by decree a state of CanHdA sPemTEi-Rpu IbIl ic enterprises.
emergency which shall confer upon him such special TIth seh Galol:v ernment
powers as may be provided for by law. - give final rulings on final judgements passed lower
(2) In the event of a serious threat to the nation's Aaurdtiictl ceo1u1rts;
territorial integrity or to its existence, its T- hexe aGmoivneer annmye ontth sehra mll aimtteprlse emxepnrte sthsley p doelvicoyl voifn gth e
independence or institutions, the President of the nuaptoionn i ta bs yd elafwin.e d by the President of the Republic.
Republic may declare a state of siege by decree and It shall be responsible to the National Assembly
take any measures as he may deem necessary. He uAnrdtiecrl et h4e2 c onditions and procedures provided for in
shall inform the Nation of his decision by message. A(1r)t iTclhee 3 o4r gbaenloizwa.t ion, functioning, composition and
duties of the Supreme Court and the benches it
Article 10 Acormticplrei s1e2s , the conditions for referring matters to
(1) The President of the Republic shall appoint the (th1e) mTh aes Pwreimll ea sM thinei sptreorc sehdaullr eb ea pthpeli cHaebaled boeff ore them
Prime Minister and, on the proposal of the latter, the Gshoavlle rbnem laeindt daonwd nsh bayll ldawire. ct its action.
other members of Government. ((22)) HThe es hoarglla bneiz raetsiopno,n fsuibnlcet ifoonri tnhge, ecnofmoprcoesmitieonnt aonf dth e
He shall define their duties. ldauwtise.s of the Courts of Appeal and judicial,
He shall terminate their appointment.
14 15
15

(p3u)b Hlice asuhtahllo erixtieersc.i sIet sshtaatlul:t ory authority and appoint (a) in ordinary session during the months of March,
t-o e cxiavmili npeo satps,p seuablsj eocnt troe gtihoen parl earnodg actoivuensc iol fe tlheec tion June and November each year, when convened by the
Pdirsepsuidteesn;t of the Republic in such areas. Bureaux of the National Assembly and the Senate,
(-4 g)i vHee f sinhaall lr duilrinecgts aolnl tahpep geoavlse rangmaiennstt sfienravli ces after consultation with the President of the Republic;
rjueqdugiermede nfotsr pthaess aecdc boym lpolwisehrm ceonutr otsf ihni sc adsuetsie osf. (b) in extraordinary session, at the request of the
(a5d)m Hinei smtraayti vdee legate some of his powers to members President of the Republic or of one-third of the
odfis Gpuotveesr; nment and to senior State officials. members of both Houses.
- examine, any other disputes expressly devolving However, the two Houses shall be convened
Auprtoincl iet 1b3y law. simultaneously only if the business of the day
The office of member of Government and any office concerns both of them.
rAarntkicilneg 4 a1s such shall be incompatible with that of (4) The two Houses of Parliament shall meet in
mTheem abuedr iot fb ePnacrlhi asmhaelnl tb, eC choamirmpeatne notf ttoh ec oEnxtreoclu atinvde or congress at the request of the President of the
Aruslsee omnb plyu bolfi ca alcoccoaul notrs r, eagsi ownealll aaus tohno rtihtyo,s ele oafd epru obfli c Republic in order to:
aa nnda tsieomnai-l ppurbolfiecs seinotnearpl raissseos.c iation, or with any other - be addressed by or receive a message from the
eItm sphlaolly:m ent or professional activity. President of the Republic ;
- give final rulings on final judgements passed lower - receive the oath of members of the Constitutional
PauAdRitT c oIIuIr ts; Council;
L- eegxiasmlaitnivee a Pnyo woethre r matters expressly devolving - take a decision on a draft or proposed constitutional
upon it by law. amendment.
Article 14 When Parliament meets in congress, the Bureau of
(A1r)t iLcleeg 4is2la tive power shall be exercised by the the National Assembly shall preside over the
P(1a)r lTiahme eonrtg wanhiizcahti oshna, lflu cnocmtiopnriisneg 2, c(otwmop)o Hsiotiuosne sa:n d proceedings.
(dau)t iTehs eo fN tahteio Snuapl rAemssee mCboluyr;t and the benches it (5) No person, shall be member of both the National
(cbo)m Tphreis eSse,n tahtee .c onditions for referring matters to Assembly and the Senate.
(th2e) mPa arsli awmeleln at ss thhael lp lreogciseldautere a anpdp cliocnatbrolel bGeofvoerern tmheemnt (6) The conditions for the election of members of the
ashctailol nb.e laid down by law. National Assembly and of the Senate, as well as
((32)) BThoeth o Hrgoaunsiezsa toiof nP,a frulinacmtieonnti nshga, lclo mmepeot soitni othne a snadm e the immunities, ineligibilities, incompatibilities,
ddautteiess: of the Courts of Appeal and judicial, allowances and privileges of the members of
Parliament shall be determined by law.
16 17
16

(3) He shall exercise statutory authority and appoint (pau)b ilnic o arudtihnoarryit iseess. sIito snh daullr:i ng the months of March,
to civil posts, subject to the prerogatives of the J- uenxea manidn eN aopvpeemalbse orn e arecghi oyneaarl ,a wndh ecno ucnocnivl eenleedct iboyn t he
President of the Republic in such areas. Bdiusrpeuatuexs; of the National Assembly and the Senate,
(4) He shall direct all the government services a- fgteivr ec ofinnsaull rtautliionng sw ointh a tphpee Parlse saigdaeinnts ot ff itnhael Republic;
required for the accomplishment of his duties. (jubd) gine mexetnrtaso prdaisnsaerdy b sye slsoiwone,r acto tuhrets r einq uceasste so fo tfh e
(5) He may delegate some of his powers to members Padremsiidneisnttr aotfiv teh e Republic or of one-third of the
of Government and to senior State officials. mdiespmubteesrs; of both Houses.
H- eoxwaemvienre, ,t hane ytw ooth Hero duissepsu stehsa lel xbper ecsosnlyv edneevdo lving
Article 13 suipmounl tiat nbeyo luaswly. only if the business of the day
The office of member of Government and any office concerns both of them.
ranking as such shall be incompatible with that of (A4r)t iTclhee 4t1w o Houses of Parliament shall meet in
member of Parliament, Chairman of the Executive or cTohneg areusdsi ta bt ethnec hr esqhuaells tb oe fc tohme pPerteesnidt eton tc oofn ttrhoel and
Assembly of a local or regional authority, leader of Rruelpe uobnl ipcu ibnl iocr daecrc otou:n ts, as well as on those of public
a national professional association, or with any other -a nbde saedmdrie-pssuebdli bc ye notre rrepcriesievse. a message from the
employment or professional activity. PItr eshsiadlel:n t of the Republic ;
-- rgeicveei vfien athl er uolainthg so fo nm feimnable jrusd ogfe tmhee nCtso npsatsistuedti olonwale r
PART III Cauoduint cciol;urts;
Legislative Power -- teaxkaem ai ndee cainsyio ont hoenr am dartateftr so re xpprorepsossleyd d ceovnoslvtiitnugti onal
aumpoenn ditm beyn lta. w.
Article 14 When Parliament meets in congress, the Bureau of
(1) Legislative power shall be exercised by the tAhret iNclaet i4o2n al Assembly shall preside over the
Parliament which shall comprise 2 (two) Houses: p(1ro) cTeheed ionrggsa.nization, functioning, composition and
(a) The National Assembly; (d5u)t iNeso opfe trhseo nS,u sphraelml bee C moeumrt baenrd o tfh be obtehn tchhee Ns iatt ional
(b) The Senate. Acosmsepmribsleys ,a tnhde tchoen Sdeitnioantes. for referring matters to
(2) Parliament shall legislate and control Government (th6e) mT haes cwoenldl iatiso tnhse fporro tcheed eulreec atipopnl iocfa bmlee mbebfeorrse o tfh tehme
action. Nshaatlilo bnea ll aAidss deomwbnly b ayn lda wof. the Senate, as well as
(3) Both Houses of Parliament shall meet on the same t(h2e) Timhme ourngitaineisz, aitnieolnig, ifbuinlicttiieosn, iinngc,o cmopmaptiobsiliittiioens ,a nd
dates: adlulotiwesa onfc eths ea nCdo uprrtisv iolef gAesp poefa tlh aen md ejumdbiceirasl o, f
Parliament shall be determined by law.
16 17
17

pCuHbAlicP TauEtRho Ir ities. It shall: (2) Each year, the National Assembly shall hold 3
-T hexe aNmaitnioe naaplp Aeasslse monb lrye gional and council election (three) ordinary sessions, each lasting not more than
disputes; 30 (thirty) days.
-A grtiivcele f i1n5a l rulings on appeals against final (a) At the opening of its first ordinary session, the
j(u1d) gTehme eNntast ipoansasle Ad sbsye mlobwlye rs hcoalulr ctso minp craissee s1 o8f0 (one National Assembly shall elect its President and
ahdumndinreisdt raantdiv eei ghty) members elected by direct and Bureau members.
dseiscpreutt eusn; iversal suffrage for a five-year term of (b) The National Assembly shall, during one of its
-o fefxicaem.ine, any other disputes expressly devolving sessions, adopt the State budget. Where such budget
uTphoen n iutm byb elra wof. members of the National Assembly is not adopted before the end of the current financial
may be modified by law. year, the President of the Republic shall be
A(2r)t iEclaec h4 1m ember of the National Assembly shall empowered to extend the previous budget by one-
Trehper easuednitt tbheen ecnht isrhea Nll abteio cno. mpetent to control and twelfth until a new one is passed.
r(u3l)e A onny p iumbpliocs aecdc mouanntdsa, taes s whaellll baes onnu ltlh aonsde voof ipdu. blic (3) The National Assembly shall meet in
a(4n)d I sne cmais-ep uobf lsiecr eionutesr cprriissiess o. r where circumstances so extraordinary session for not more than 15 (fifteen)
Iwt asrhraalnl:t , the President of the Republic may, after days on a specific agenda and at the request of the
-c ognivsue lftaintiaoln r uwliinthg st hoen P friensaild jeundtg oefm thene tCs opnassstietdu tlioownaelr President of the Republic or of one-third of its
aCuoduint cciol uarntsd; Bureaux of the National Assembly and members.
-th eex Sameniantee ,a rneyq outehset rt hmea Nttaetriso enxapl rAessssleym dbelvyo tlov idnegc ide, The extraordinary session shall wind up as soon as
ubpy olnaw it, btoy elaxwte.n d or abridge its term of office. In this the agenda for which it was convened is exhausted.
case, the election of a new Assembly shall take place
Anortti lcelses 4 t2h an 40 (forty) days and not more than 120 Article 17
((1o)n eT hheu nodrrgeadn iaznadti otwn,e nfutyn)c tdioaynsin fgo,l lcoowminpgo stihtieo enx apnidry (1) Sittings of the National Assembly shall be public.
douf ttihees eoxf ttehnes iSounp orer maber Cidoguermt eanntd ptehrei obde.n ches it Exceptionally, the National Assembly may hold
comprises, the conditions for referring matters to sittings in camera at the request of the President of
tAhretmic laes 1 w6 ell as the procedure applicable before them the Republic or of an absolute majority of its
s(1h)a lAl bt eth lea ibde dgoinwnnin bgy o lfa ewa.c h legislative year, the members.
(N2a)t Tiohnea lo Argsasneimzabtliyo ns,h faulln mctieoent iansg o, fc orimghpto isnit ioornd iannadry (2) The National Assembly shall, in a law, draw up
dseustsieios no fu nthdee rC tohuer ctso nodf iAtipopnes alla iadn dd ojuwdni cbiyal ,l aw. its standing orders.
18 19
18

CHAPTER I p(2u)b Eliacc ahu ytheoarri,t itehse. NIt asthioanlla: l Assembly shall hold 3
The National Assembly -( tehxreaem) ionred ainpapreya lsse sosnio rnesg,i oenacahl alnasdt icnogu nnocitl m eloercet itohna n
d3i0s p(tuhtiersty; ) days.
Article 15 -( ag)i vAet ftihnea ol pruelnininggs oofn i atsp fpiersatl so ardgianianrsyt fsiensasli on, the
(1) The National Assembly shall comprise 180 (one jNuadtgioenmaeln Atss speamssbeldy bsyh allolw eleerc ct oitusr tPsr iens icdaesnets a onfd
hundred and eighty) members elected by direct and aBdumreianuis mtraetmivbee rs.
secret universal suffrage for a five-year term of d(bis)p Tuhtees N; ational Assembly shall, during one of its
office. -s eesxsaiomnisn,e a, daonpyt oththee Sr tdaitsep buutedsg eetx. pWrehsselrye dsuevcho lbvuindgg et
The number of members of the National Assembly uisp noont iat dboyp ltaewd .b efore the end of the current financial
may be modified by law. year, the President of the Republic shall be
(2) Each member of the National Assembly shall Aemrtpicolwe e4r1e d to extend the previous budget by one-
represent the entire Nation. Ttwheel fatuhd uitn btiel nac nhe swh aolnl eb eis c poamsspeedte. nt to control and
(3) Any imposed mandate shall be null and void. r(3u)le T ohne pNuabtliiocn aacl cAosusnetms, balsy wshealll la ms oenet tihno se of public
(4) In case of serious crisis or where circumstances so aenxtdr asoermdii-npauryb lsice sesniotenr pforirs enso.t more than 15 (fifteen)
warrant, the President of the Republic may, after Idta syhsa olln: a specific agenda and at the request of the
consultation with the President of the Constitutional -P rgeisvied efinnta ol fr uthlien gRse pounb fliinca ol rj uodfg oenmee-tnhtisr dp aosfs ietds lower
Council and Bureaux of the National Assembly and amuedmitb ceorus.r ts;
the Senate, request the National Assembly to decide, -T ehxea emxitnraeo ardniyn oarthye sre mssaiottne rssh eaxllp wreisnsdly u dpe avso slvoionng as
by law, to extend or abridge its term of office. In this uthpeo ang iet nbdya lfaowr .w hich it was convened is exhausted.
case, the election of a new Assembly shall take place
not less than 40 (forty) days and not more than 120 AArrttiiccllee 4127
(one hundred and twenty) days following the expiry ((11)) STihttei nogrgs aonfi zthaeti oNna,t ifounnaclt iAonssinegm, bcloym sphoalsli tbioe np uanbdli c.
of the extension or abridgement period. dEuxtcieesp toiof nthaell yS,u tphree Nmaet iCoonuarl tA asnsde mthbel bye mncahye hso iltd
csiottminpgrsis iens ,c tahme ecroan adti ttihoen rse fqoure rset foefr rtihneg Pmreasttiedresn tto o f
Article 16 tthheem R eaps uwbelilcl aosr tohfe a pnr oabcesodluurtee amppajloicraitbyl eo fb eitfso re them
(1) At the beginning of each legislative year, the smheamll bbeer sla. id down by law.
National Assembly shall meet as of right in ordinary ((22)) TThhee Noragtaionnizaal tAiosns,e fmunbclyti oshnainllg, ,i nco am lapwos,i dtiroanw a unpd
session under the conditions laid down by law. ditus tsietasn odfi nthge o Crdoeurrst.s of Appeal and judicial,
18 19
19

Apurtbilcilce a1u8t horities. It shall: Where a private members' bill has not been
(-1 e)x Tamhei naeg eanpdpae aolfs tohne rNegaitoionnaal la Andss ceomubnlcyi ls ehlaelcl tbioen considered during two successive ordinary sessions,
ddrisapwunte usp; by the Chairmen's conference. it shall automatically be considered at the very next
(-2 g)i vTeh efi nCahla riurmlinegns's o cno napfepreeanlcse a sghaainlls tb efi ncaolm posed of ordinary session.
Pjurdegsiedmenetnst so fp aPsasreldia mbye nlotawreyr G croouurptss ,i nC chaasierms oefn of (5) Any item on the agenda shall, at the request of the
Cadommimniistttreaetsiv aen d members of the Bureau of the Government, be treated as a matter of urgency.
Ndiastpiuotneasl; Assembly. A member of Government shall
p- aerxtaicmipinatee, iann yth oet hcoern fdeirsepnuctee sm eexeptrinesgs.l y devolving Article 19
(u3p)o On nitl yb yb illalsw f.a lling within its area of jurisdiction by (1) Laws shall be passed by a simple majority of the
virtue of Article 26 below may be included in the members of the National Assembly.
aAgretincdlea 4o1f the National Assembly. (2) Bills submitted to the National Assembly for
(Tah) eA alul dpirti vbaetnec mh eshmablle rbse' bciolmls paentde natm toe ncdomnternotls a nd reconsideration by the Senate shall either be passed
wruhleic ohn, ipf upbalsicse adc,c wouonutlsd, raess uwlet liln a tsh oe nr etdhuocseti oonf pouf blic or, rejected in accordance with Article 30 below.
panudb lsice mfuin-pdusb olirc i ne natne ripnrcirseeass. e of public charges (3) The President of the Republic may, before
wIt isthhaolul:t a corresponding reduction in other enacting any law, ask for a second reading. In such
e- xgpiveen dfiitnuarle r ourli nthges gorna nfitn oafl ejuqdugiveamleenntt sn epwas sseudp plolyw oefr case, bills shall be passed by an absolute majority of
fauunddits ,c oshuartlsl ;b e inadmissible. the members of the National Assembly.
(-b e)x Aamnyin deo aunbyt oorth deirs pmuatett eorns tehxep aredsmsliys sdibeviloitlyv ionfg a bill
suhpaolnl bite brye flearwre.d by the President of the Republic, CHAPTER II
the President of the National Assembly or by one- The Senate
tAhritridc loef 4t2h e members of the National Assembly to the
C(1o)n Tsthietu otirognaanli zCaotiuonnc, ifl ufnocr taio rnuilningg, .c omposition and Article 20
(d4u)t iTesh eo fa gtheen dSau pshreamll eg iCvoe uprrti oanridty t,h aen bde innc hthees oitr der (1) The Senate shall represent the regional and local
dcoecmidperids ebsy, tthhee cGoonvdeirtinomnse nfto,r t ore tfheerr cinogn smidaettreartiso tno of authorities.
tthhee mgo avse wrnemlle anst tbhiell sp raoncde dpurirvea atep pmliecmabbleer sb'e bfiolrlse them (2) Each region shall be represented in the Senate by
ashccaellp bteed l abiyd idt.o Twhne b oyt hlaewr p. rivate members' bills 10 (ten) Senators of whom 7 (seven) shall be
a(2d)m Tithteed o brgya tnhiez aCtihoani,r mfuennc'tsi oCnoinngfe, rceonmcep sohsaitlilo bne a nd elected by indirect universal suffrage on a regional
cdountiseisd eorfe tdh es uCboseuqrtuse onft lAy.p peal and judicial, basis and 3 (three) appointed by the President of the
Republic.
20 21
20

Article 18 Wpuhbelirce aau pthriovraittiee sm. eItm sbhearlsl:' bill has not been
(1) The agenda of the National Assembly shall be c- oenxsaimdeinreed a dpupreianlgs towno r esguicocneasls iavned o croduinnacriyl esleescstiioonns ,
drawn up by the Chairmen's conference. idti ssphualtle sa;u tomatically be considered at the very next
(2) The Chairmen's conference shall be composed of o- rgdiivnea rfyin sael srsuiloinn.g s on appeals against final
Presidents of Parliamentary Groups, Chairmen of (ju5d) gAenmye intetsm p aosns ethde b ayg leonwdae rs choaullr,t as ti nth cea rseeqsu oefs t of the
Committees and members of the Bureau of the Gadomveinrnismtreantitv, eb e treated as a matter of urgency.
National Assembly. A member of Government shall disputes;
participate in the conference meeting. A- ertxicalme i1n9e , any other disputes expressly devolving
(3) Only bills falling within its area of jurisdiction by (u1p)o Lna iwt bs ys hlaawll .b e passed by a simple majority of the
virtue of Article 26 below may be included in the members of the National Assembly.
agenda of the National Assembly. (A2r)t iBcliell s4 1su bmitted to the National Assembly for
(a) All private members' bills and amendments rTehceo nasuiddiet rbaetinocnh b syh athlle b See cnoamtep sehtaelnlt e tioth ceorn btreo pl aasnsde d
which, if passed, would result in the reduction of orur,l er eojne cpteudb liinc aaccccoorudnatns,c aes w witehl lA arst iocnle t h3o0s bee olof wpu. blic
public funds or in an increase of public charges (a3n)d T sheem Pi-rpeusbidliecn te notfe trhper iRseesp. ublic may, before
without a corresponding reduction in other eItn sahcatilnl:g any law, ask for a second reading. In such
expenditure or the grant of equivalent new supply of c- agsiev,e b fiilnlsa ls hrualliln bges poans sfeinda bl yju adng eambseonltust ep amsasejodr iltoyw oefr
funds, shall be inadmissible. tahued imt ecmoubretsr;s of the National Assembly.
(b) Any doubt or dispute on the admissibility of a bill - examine any other matters expressly devolving
shall be referred by the President of the Republic, CupHoAn PitT bEyR l aIwI .
the President of the National Assembly or by one- The Senate
third of the members of the National Assembly to the Article 42
Constitutional Council for a ruling. A(1r)t iTclhee 2 o0r ganization, functioning, composition and
(4) The agenda shall give priority, and in the order (d1u)t iTesh eo fS tehnea tSeu sphraelml ree Cproeusretn at nthde t hreeg bieonncahl easn dit local
decided by the Government, to the consideration of acuotmhoprriitsieess,. the conditions for referring matters to
the government bills and private members' bills (th2e) mE aacsh w reeglli oans tshhea lpl rboec erdeuprrees aepnptelidc ainb lteh eb eSfeonrea tteh ebmy
accepted by it. The other private members' bills 1sh0a (ltle bne) lSaeidn adtoowrsn o bf yw lhaowm. 7 (seven) shall be
admitted by the Chairmen's Conference shall be e(2le)c Ttehde boyr gianndiizreactito unn, ifvuenrcstailo snuinffgr,a cgoem onp oas irteigoino annadl
considered subsequently. bdaustiies sa onfd t3h e( tChroeuer)t sa popf oAinptpeeda bl yan tdh ej uPdriecsiiadle, nt of the
Republic.
20 21
21

(p3u)b Clica naduitdhaotreist ifeosr. Itht esh paolls:t of Senator and (2) The Senate shall, in a law, draw up its standing
p- eerxsaomnainlieti easp paepaplos ionnte rde tgoi otnhael p aonsdt ocof uSnecnial teolre bctyi otnh e orders.
Pdirsepsuidteesn;t of the Republic must have attained the age
o- fg 4iv0e (ffionratly )r ublyin tghse o dna taep opfe athlse aeglaeicntisot nf ionra l Article 23
ajupdpgoeinmtemnetns tp. assed by lower courts in cases of (1) The agenda of the Senate shall be drawn up by the
(a4d)m Siennisattroartsiv seh all serve a term of 5 (five) years. Chairmen's conference.
disputes; (2) The Chairmen's conference shall be composed of
A- ertxiacmle i2n1e , any other disputes expressly devolving Presidents of Parliamentary Groups, Chairmen of
(u1p)o An ti tt hbey blaewgi.n ning of each legislative year, the Committees and members of the Bureau of the
Senate shall meet as of right in ordinary session Senate. A member of Government shall participate in
uAnrdtiecrle t h4e1 conditions laid down by law. the conference meeting.
(T2h)e E aaucdhi ty beeanr,c thh esh Saelln batee c sohmalpl ehtoenldt t3o (cthornetero) lo ardnidn ary (3) Only bills falling with in its area of jurisdiction by
sruesles ioonn sp, uebalcihc alacsctoinugn tnso, ta sm woreel lt ahsa no n3 0th (othseir toyf) public virtue of Article 26 below may be included in the
danayds s. emi-public enterprises. agenda of the Senate.
AIt ts thhaell o: pening of its first ordinary session, the Senate (a) All private members' bills and amendments
s- hgailvle e fleincat li trsu Plirnegssi doenn tf iannadl jBuudrgeeamu emntesm pbaesrsse.d lower which, if passed, would result in the reduction of
(a3u)d Tit hceo uSretns;a te shall meet in extraordinary session for public funds or in an increase of public charges
n- oetx mamoirnee t haanny 1o5th (efri fmteaetnte) rdsa eyxsp orens as lsyp deecvifoiclv ing without a corresponding reduction in other
augpeonnd iat banyd l aawt t. he request of the President of the expenditure or the grant of equivalent new supply of
Republic or of one-third of its members. funds, shall be inadmissible.
TAhrteic elxe t4ra2o rdinary session shall wind up as soon as (b) Any doubt or dispute on the admissibility of a bill
t(h1e) Tagheen odrag faonri zwathiiocnh, iftu wncatsi ocnoinnvge, nceodm ips oesxihtiaouns atendd. shall be referred by the President of the Republic,
duties of the Supreme Court and the benches it the President of the Senate or one-third of the
Acormticplrei s2e2s , the conditions for referring matters to Senators to the Constitutional Council for a ruling.
(th1e) mSi attsi nwges lol fa sth teh eS epnroactee dsuhraell abpep pliucbablilce. before them (4) The agenda shall give priority, and in the order
Eshxaclel pbteio lnaaidll yd,o twhne Sbyen laatwe .m ay hold sittings in camera decided by the Government, to the consideration of
a(2t )t hTeh ree qourgeasnt iozfa tthioen P, rfeusnicdteionnt ionfg t,h ceo Rmeppousbitliioc no ra nodf the government bills and private members' bills
adnu taiebss oolfu tthee m Caojourrittsy o off A itpsp meaelm abnedr sju. dicial, accepted by it. The other private members' bills
22 23
22

(3) Candidates for the post of Senator and (p2u)b Tlihc ea uStehnoartieti sehs.a lIlt, sihna all :l aw, draw up its standing
personalities appointed to the post of Senator by the o- redxearms.ine appeals on regional and council election
President of the Republic must have attained the age disputes;
of 40 (forty) by the date of the election or A- grtiivcele f i2n3a l rulings on appeals against final
appointment. (ju1d) gTehme eangtes npdaas soefd t hbey Sloewnaetre csohuarltls b ien dcraaswesn oufp by the
(4) Senators shall serve a term of 5 (five) years. Cadhmaiirnmisetrna'sti cvoen ference.
(d2is) pTuhtees C; hairmen's conference shall be composed of
Article 21 P- reexsaimdeinntes, oafn yP aortlhiaemr deinstpauryte Gs reoxuppres,s sClyh adiermvoelnv ionfg
(1) At the beginning of each legislative year, the Cupoomnm iti tbteye lsa wan. d members of the Bureau of the
Senate shall meet as of right in ordinary session Senate. A member of Government shall participate in
under the conditions laid down by law. tAhret iccolen f4e1r ence meeting.
(2) Each year, the Senate shall hold 3 (three) ordinary (T3h)e O anuldyi tb bilelsn cfhal lsihnagl lw bieth c oinm iptse taerneta toof c jounritsrdoilc atniodn by
sessions, each lasting not more than 30 (thirty) vruirlteu oen o pf uAbrltiicc laec 2co6u bnetlso, was m waeyll b aes ionnc ltuhdoesde ionf tphueb lic
days. aagnedn sdeam oi-fp tuhbe lSice nenattee.r prises.
At the opening of its first ordinary session, the Senate (Iat )s hAallll :p rivate members' bills and amendments
shall elect its President and Bureau members. w- ghiivceh ,f iinf apla rsusleidn,g ws oonu lfdi nraels ujultd igne tmheen rtesd puacstsioend olofw er
(3) The Senate shall meet in extraordinary session for pauudbilti cc ofuunrtdss; or in an increase of public charges
not more than 15 (fifteen) days on a specific w- eitxhaomuitn ae caonryre ostphoenrd minagtt erersd uecxtpiorens sinly o dtheevro lving
agenda and at the request of the President of the euxppoenn idt ibtuyr ela owr. the grant of equivalent new supply of
Republic or of one-third of its members. funds, shall be inadmissible.
The extraordinary session shall wind up as soon as (Abr)t iAclney 4 d2o ubt or dispute on the admissibility of a bill
the agenda for which it was convened is exhausted. s(1h)a lTl hbee orergfearnriezda tbioyn t,h feu Pnrcetsioidneinngt ,o cf othmep Roseiptiuobnl iacn, d
tdhuet iPesre osfi dtehnet S oufp trheem See Cnaotuer ot ra nodn et-hteh ibrden ocfh tehse i t
Article 22 Scoemnaptroirsse sto, tthhee cCoonndsittiitountsio fnoarl rCefoeurrnicnigl fmora tat errusl itnog .
(1) Sittings of the Senate shall be public. (th4e) mT haes awgeelnl daas sthhea lpl rgoicveed purrieo raiptyp,l iacnadb lien bthefeo orerd tehre m
Exceptionally, the Senate may hold sittings in camera dsheaclild bede lbayid t hdeo Gwonv beyr nlmawe.n t, to the consideration of
at the request of the President of the Republic or of t(h2e) Tgohvee orrngmaennizt abtiiollns ,a fnudn cptriiovnaitneg m, ceommbpeorss'i btiiollns and
an absolute majority of its members. adcuctieepst eodf tbhye iCt. oTuhrets o otfh eAr pppreivaal taen md ejumdbiceirasl' ,b ills
22 23
23

apdumbliitct eadu tbhyo trhiteie Cs.h Iati srmhaelnl:' s Conference shall be Article 26
c- oenxsaimdeinreed a spupbesaelqs uoenn rtleyg.i onal and council election (1) Bills shall be passed by Parliament.
Wdishpeurtee sa; private members' bill has not been (2) The following shall be reserved to the Legislative
c- ognivsied feirneadl druulriinnggs towno a spupcecaelsss aivgea ionrsdt ifnianrayl sessions, Power:
ijtu dshgaelml aeunttos mpaastisceadl lbyy b leo wcoenrs cidoeurretsd iant cthaese vse oryf next (a) The fundamental rights, guarantees and
oadrdmininairsyt rsaetsivsieo n. obligations of the citizen:
(d5is) pAunteys ;i tem on the agenda shall, at the request of the 1. safeguarding individual freedom and security;
G- eoxvaemrnimnee,n atn, yb eo tthreeart eddis pasu tae sm eaxttperre ossfl yu rdgeevnoclyv.i ng 2. the rules governing public freedoms;
upon it by law. 3. labour legislation, trade union legislation, rules
Article 24 governing social security and insurance;
(A1r)t iLclaew 4s1 s hall be passed by a simple majority of the 4. the duties and obligations of the citizen in respect
STehnea atourdsi.t bench shall be competent to control and of national defence requirement&.
(r2u)le T ohne pSuebnlaicte a mccaoyu anmtse, nads wore lrle jaesc ot na ltlh oors ep aorft pouf bal ic (b) The status of persons and property ownership
banildl ssuebmmi-ipttuebdl itco eitn fteorrp croisnessi.d eration, in accordance system:
wIt isthha Allr: ticle 30 below. 1. nationality, status of persons, matrimonial system,
(-3 g)i vTeh efi nParel sriudleinngt so of nth fei nRael pjuudbgliecm meanyts, bpeafsosered lower succession and gifts;
eanuadcitt icnogu art sla; w, ask for a second reading 2. rules governing civil and commercial obligations;
I-n e xsuacmhi ncea saen, yb ioltlhs esrh malla tbteer ps aesxsperde sbsyl ya nd eavboslovliuntge 3. movable and immovable property ownership
mupaojonr iitt yb yo fl athwe. Senators. system.
(c) The political, administrative and judicial
PAArtiRclTe 4IV2 organization:
R(1e)l aTthioen osr Bgaentwizeaetnio tnh,e f uEnxcetciuotniivneg a, ncdo mLepgoissiltaiotinv ea nd 1. rules governing election of the President of the
Pduotwieesr sof the Supreme Court and the benches it Republic and elections into the National Assembly,
comprises, the conditions for referring matters to the Senate, Regional and Local Bodies and
Athretmicl aes 2 w5 ell as the procedure applicable before them referendum operations;
Bshialllsl mbea yla ibde dtaobwlend b eyi tlhaewr .b y the President of the 2. rules governing associations and political parties;
R(2e)p Tuhbeli co rogra bnyiz mateiomnb, efursn cotfi opnairnliga,m ceonmt.p osition and 3. the organization, functioning, powers and
duties of the Courts of Appeal and judicial, resources of regional and local authorities;
24 25
24

admitted by the Chairmen's Conference shall be Apurtbilcilce a2u6t horities. It shall:
considered subsequently. (-1 e)x Bamillisn esh aapllp ebael sp aosns erdeg bioyn Paal ralinadm ceonut.n cil election
Where a private members' bill has not been (d2is) pTuhtees f;o llowing shall be reserved to the Legislative
considered during two successive ordinary sessions, P- ogwiveer :final rulings on appeals against final
it shall automatically be considered at the very next (jua)d gTehme efnutnsd paamsseendta bl yri glohwtse, rg cuoaurartnst eine sc aanseds of
ordinary session. oadbmliginaitisotrnast iovfe the citizen:
(5) Any item on the agenda shall, at the request of the 1d.i sspaufetegsu; arding individual freedom and security;
Government, be treated as a matter of urgency. 2- .e txhaem riunlee,s agnoyv eorthneinrg d pisupbultiecs f erexepdroesmslsy; devolving
3u.p loanb oitu br yl elgaiwsl.a tion, trade union legislation, rules
Article 24 governing social security and insurance;
(1) Laws shall be passed by a simple majority of the 4A.r tthicel ed 4u1ti es and obligations of the citizen in respect
Senators. oTfh ne aatuiodnita lb denefcehn schea rlel qbuei rceommepnett&en. t to control and
(2) The Senate may amend or reject all or part of a (rbu)le T ohne psutabtluisc oafc cpoeursnotsn,s a asn wd epllr oapse ornty t ohwosnee orsfh pipu blic
bill submitted to it for consideration, in accordance saynsdt esmem: i-public enterprises.
with Article 30 below. 1It. snhaatlilo:n ality, status of persons, matrimonial system,
(3) The President of the Republic may, before s- ugcicvees fsiinoanl arnudli nggifst so;n final judgements passed lower
enacting a law, ask for a second reading 2au. druitl ecso guortvse; rning civil and commercial obligations;
In such case, bills shall be passed by an absolute 3- .e mxaomvianbel ea nanyd o itmhemr omvaatbtelers p erxoppreerstsyl yo wdenveorslvhiinpg
majority of the Senators. suypsotnem it. by law.
(c) The political, administrative and judicial
PART IV oArrgtiacnliez 4at2i on:
Relations Between the Executive and Legislative 1(1. )r uTlhees goorgvaenrnizinatgio enle, cfutinocnt ioofn tihneg ,P croesmidpeonsti toiof nth aen d
Powers Rduetpieusb loifc tahned S eulpecretimones C inotuor tt haen dN tahteio bneanl cAhsesse imt bly,
tchoem Spernisaetse,, tRheeg cioonndali taionnds L foorc arle fBeorrdiinegs manadtt ers to
Article 25 rthefeemre ansd wumel lo apse rtahtei opnrso;c edure applicable before them
Bills may be tabled either by the President of the 2sh. arulll ebse glaoivde drnoiwngn absys olacwia.t ions and political parties;
Republic or by members of parliament. 3(2. )t hTeh oer ogragnainzaiztiaotino, nf,u fnucnticotinoinnign, gp,o cwomerps oasnidti on and
rdeustoieusr coefs t hoef rCeoguiorntsa lo fa nAdp lpoecaall aanudth jourdiitcieias;l ,
24 25
25

4p.u gbelince arault hruolreitsi egso. vIet rsnhianlgl: the organization of
n- aetxioanmailn dee afepnpceea;l s on regional and council election
5d.i sjupduitceisa; l organization and the creation of various
t-y gpievse o ffi ncaolu rrutsli;n gs on appeals against final
6ju. dthgee mdeefnintsi tpioanss oefd fbeylo lnoiwese ra ncdo umrtiss dine mcaesaenso oufr s and
tahdem ininsitsitturatitoivne o f penalties of all kinds, criminal
pdriospceudteusr;e , civil procedure, measures of execution,
a-m exnaemstyin. e, any other disputes expressly devolving
(udp)o Tnh iet bfoyl lloawwi.n g financial and patrimonial matters:
1. rules governing the issue of currency;
2A.r tthicel eb u4d1g et;
3T.h teh ea ucdreita tbieonnc ohf sdhuatlile bs ea ncodm thpee tdeentte rtmo cinoanttiroonl oanf dth eir
bruasleis o onf paussbeliscs macecnotu, nratste, sa sa nwde mll eatsh oond st hoof se of public
caonldle scetimoin-;public enterprises.
4It. slahnadll :t enure, State lands and mining;
5- .g nivateu frianl arle rsuoluinrcgess o. n final judgements passed lower
(aeu)d Pitr ocgoruarmtsm; ing the objectives of economic and
s-o ecxiaalm aicnteio ann. y other matters expressly devolving
(ufp) oTnh eit sbyys tleamw .o f education.
AArrttiiccllee 2472
M(1a) tTtehrse noorgt arnesizearvtieodn ,t ofu tnhcet iloegniisnlga,t icvoem ppoowseitri osnh aalnl d
cdoumtiees u onfd tehre t hSeu pjurreimsdei cCtioounr to af ntdh et haeu tbheonrcithye s it
ecmompopwrieseresd, tthoe icsosuned irtuiolenss afnodr rreefgeurlraintigo nmsa. tters to
them as well as the procedure applicable before them
Ashrtailcll be e2 l8a id down by law.
((12)) HTohwe oevrgear,n wiziatthio rne,g faurdn cttoio tnhien sgu, bcjoemctps olissitteiodn i na nd
Adurttiicelse o 2f6 t h(2e )C aobuorvtse ,o Pf aArlpiapmeaeln atn md ajyu deimcipaol,w er the
26
26

4. general rules governing the organization of Ppurebsliidce anut tohfo rthiteie Rs.e Ipt usbhlaicll :t o legislate by way of
national defence; o- redxianmanincee faoprp ae alilms oitne dre pgeiorinoadl aanndd fcooru gnicviel ne lpeucrtipoons es.
5. judicial organization and the creation of various (d2is) pSuutcehs; ordinances shall enter into force on the date
types of courts; o- fg tihveei rf ipnualb lriuclaintigosn .o Tn haepyp esahlasl la bgea itnasbtl feidn able fore the
6. the definition of felonies and misdemeanours and bjuudrgeaeumxe notfs t hpea sNseadti obnya llo Awsesre cmobulryts a innd c tahsee sS oenf ate for
the institution of penalties of all kinds, criminal padumrpionsiesstr aotfi vraet ification within the time-limit laid
procedure, civil procedure, measures of execution, ddoiswpunt besy; the enabling law. They shall be of a
amnesty. s- teaxtuatmoriyn en,a atnuyre o atsh elor ndgis apsu ttehse ye xhparvees snloyt d beeveonl ving
(d) The following financial and patrimonial matters: ruaptoifnie idt .b y law.
1. rules governing the issue of currency; (3) They shall remain in force as long as Parliament
2. the budget; hAarsti cnloet 4re1f used to ratify them.
3. the creation of duties and the determination of their The audit bench shall be competent to control and
basis of assessment, rates and methods of Arurlteic olen 2p9u blic accounts, as well as on those of public
collection; (a1n)d G seomveir-npmubelnict beniltlesr apnrids epsr.i vate members' bills shall
4. land tenure, State lands and mining; bIte s thaabllle: d at the same toe before the bureaux of the
5. natural resources. N- gaitvioen failn Aals rsuelminbglsy oann dfi nthael jSuedngaetme. eTnhtse yp asshsaeldl bloew er
(e) Programming the objectives of economic and satuuddiite cdo buyrt sth; e appropriate committees prior to their
social action. b- eeixnagm dienbea atendy iont hpeler nmaarytt esress seixopnr.e ssly devolving
(f) The system of education. (u2p)o Tnh iet bbyil ll adweb. ated in plenary session shall be that
tabled by the President of the Republic. The private
Article 27 mAretmicblee r4s2 b ill debated in plenary session shall be the
Matters not reserved to the legislative power shall n(1e)x tT thaeb loerdg abnyi zitast iaount,h fourn ocrt iaountihnogr,s c. omposition and
come under the jurisdiction of the authority (d3u)t iSeus cohf bthilel sS muparye mbee aCmoeunrdt eadn din t hthee b ceonuchrsees oitf the
empowered to issue rules and regulations. dcoebmapteri. ses, the conditions for referring matters to
them as well as the procedure applicable before them
Article 28 Ashratilcl lbee 3 l0a id down by law.
(1) However, with regard to the subjects listed in ((12)) ATh bei lol rpgaasnsiezda tbioyn t,h feu Nncattiioonnianlg A, csosemmpbolsyit siohna lal nbde
Article 26 (2) above, Parliament may empower the idmutmieesd oiaft ethlye fCoorwuratsrd oefd A top ptheea lP arnedsi jduednitc oiafl ,t he
Senate by the President of the National Assembly.
26 27
27

(p2u)b Tlihc ea uPtrheosirditeienst .o Ift tshhea lSl:e nate shall, upon receiving President of the Senate for reconsideration.
t-h eex baimlli nfoer awpapredaelds boyn trheeg iPorneasli daenndt coofu Nncaitli oenleacl tion 1. The National Assembly shall, after deliberations,
Adissspeumtebsl;y , submit it to the Senate for consideration. pass the bill by absolute majority of its members.
(-3 g)i vWe iftihnianl 1r0u l(intogns) odna yasp,p weaitlhs aegffaeicnts tf rfoinma lt he date of The final bill adopted by the National Assembly shall
rjuecdegiepmt oenf ttsh ep absislel do rb 5y( lfoivwee) rd caoyusr ftos ri na cbailsle ds eocfl ared be forwarded to the President of the Republic for
uadrgmeinnti sbtyra tthivee G overnment, the Senate may: enactment.
(dai)s pPuatsess ;t he bill. 2. Where an absolute majority cannot be reached, the
I-n e xwahmicinhe c, aasney, tohteh ePrr edsiisdpeuntet so fe xthper eSseslnya tdee svhoalvlli nregt urn President of the Republic may convene a meeting
tuhpeo and iot pbtye dla bwil.l to the President of the National of a joint commission comprising equal
Assembly who shall forward same within 48 (forty- representation of both houses to propose a common
eAirgthictl)e h 4o1u rs to the President of the Republic for formulation of the provisions rejected by the Senate.
eTnhaec atmudeint tb. ench shall be competent to control and The text prepared by the joint commission shall be
(rbu)le A omn epnudb ltihce a bcicllo.u nts, as well as on those of public submitted to both Houses by the President of the
Sanudc hs eammie-npdumbleicn te nmteurspt rbisee asp. proved by a simple Republic for approval.
mIt asjhoarlilt:y of the Senators. No amendment shall be admissible, except with the
I-n g wivhei fcihn acla rsuel, itnhges aomn efnindaeld j ubdilgl esmhaelnl tbse p raestsuerdn elodw toe r approval of the President of the Republic.
tahued iNt actoiounrtasl; Assembly by the President of the Where the joint commission falls to agree on a
S- eenxaatme ifnoer arnecyo ontshiedre rmataitotenr.s expressly devolving common text, or where such text is not adopted by
Tuphoen a mit ebnyd lmawen. t proposed by the Senate shall be both Houses, the President of the Republic may:
passed or rejected by a simple majority of the - either request the National Assembly to take a final
mAretmicblee r4s2 o f the National Assembly. decision thereon; or
T(1h)e T fhinea ol rbgialln aizdaotpiotend, fsuhnacllt iboen ifnogr,w caormdepdo bsiyti othne and - declare the government bill or private members' bill
Pduretiseids eonft tohfe tShuep Nreamtioe nCaol uArst saenmdb tlhye tboe tnhceh Perse isti dent null and void.
ocof mthper iRseesp,u tbhleic c foonrd eitniaocntsm feonr tr. eferring matters to
(thc)e mR eajse cwt eallll aosr tphaer tp orof ctehdeu briel la. pplicable before them Article 31
Sshuaclhl breej elacitdio dno mwuns bt yb ela awp.p roved by an absolute (1) The President of the Republic shall enact laws
m(2a) jTorhiety o orgf athneiz saetinoanto, rfsu.n ctioning, composition and passed by Parliament within 15 (fifteen) days of their
Idnu twiehsi cohf tchaes eC, othuert sre ojef cAtepdp beailll awnidth j urdeaicsioanl,s therefor being forwarded to him unless he requests a second
shall be returned to the National Assembly by the reading or refers the matter to the Constitutional
28 29
28

(2) The President of the Senate shall, upon receiving Ppurebsliidce anutt ohfo rtihteie Ss.e Inta sthe aflol:r reconsideration.
the bill forwarded by the President of National 1- .e Txahme iNneat aiopnpaela Als sosnem rebglyio snhaal lal,n adf tceoru dnecliilb eelreactitoionns ,
Assembly, submit it to the Senate for consideration. pdaisspsu tthees ;b ill by absolute majority of its members.
(3) Within 10 (ton) days, with effect from the date of T- ghiev fei nfianl abli rllu alidnogpst oedn bapyp tehael sN aagtiaoinnastl fAinsasel mbly shall
receipt of the bill or 5(five) days for a bill declared bjued fgoermweanrdtse dp atsos ethde b Pyr elosiwdeern tc oouf rtthse i nR ecpasuebsl iocf f or
urgent by the Government, the Senate may: eandamcitnmisetnrat.t ive
(a) Pass the bill. 2d.i sWpuhteerse; an absolute majority cannot be reached, the
In which case, the President of the Senate shall return P- reexsaimdeinnte o, fa nthye o Rtheepru dbilsipc umteasy e cxopnrvesesnley ad emveoeltviinngg
the adopted bill to the President of the National oufp oan j oiti nbty c olamwm. ission comprising equal
Assembly who shall forward same within 48 (forty- representation of both houses to propose a common
eight) hours to the President of the Republic for fAorrtmiculela 4ti1o n of the provisions rejected by the Senate.
enactment. TThhee taeuxdti tp rbeepnacrhe ds hbayl lt hbee jcooimntp ceotemnmt tios scioonnt srohla laln bde
(b) Amend the bill. sruulbem ointt epdu btoli cb oatchc oHuonutss,e sa sb wy ethlle a Psr oensi dtheonst eo of ft hpeu blic
Such amendment must be approved by a simple Ranedp usebmlici- fpourb alipcp eronvtearlp. rises.
majority of the Senators. NIt os haamlle: ndment shall be admissible, except with the
In which case, the amended bill shall be returned to a- pgpivroev fainl aolf rtuhlein Pgrse soind efnint aol fj uthdeg eRmepeunbtsl ipca. ssed lower
the National Assembly by the President of the Wauhdeitr ec othuert sjo; int commission falls to agree on a
Senate for reconsideration. c- oemxammoinn et eaxnty, oort hwehr emrea tstuecrsh etxexptr eisss nlyo td aedvooplvteindg b y
The amendment proposed by the Senate shall be buoptohn Hito buys elsa,w th. e President of the Republic may:
passed or rejected by a simple majority of the - either request the National Assembly to take a final
members of the National Assembly. dAerctiicslieo n4 2th ereon; or
The final bill adopted shall be forwarded by the -( 1d)e Tclhaer eo trhgea ngiozvaetironnm, efunnt cbtiilol noirn gp,r icvoamtep moseimtiobne rasn' bdi ll
President of the National Assembly to the President nduultli easn odf vtohied S. upreme Court and the benches it
of the Republic for enactment. comprises, the conditions for referring matters to
(c) Reject all or part of the bill. Athretmicl aes 3 w1 ell as the procedure applicable before them
Such rejection must be approved by an absolute (s1h)a lTl hbee Plarieds iddoewntn o bf yth lea wR.e public shall enact laws
majority of the senators. p(2a)s sTehde b oyr gPaanrliizaamtioennt, wfuinthcitnio 1n5in (gf,i fctoeemnp) odsaityiso no fa nthde ir
In which case, the rejected bill with reasons therefor bdeuitniegs foofr wthaer dCeodu trots h oifm A upnpleeassl ahned r ejuqduiecsitasl ,a second
shall be returned to the National Assembly by the reading or refers the matter to the Constitutional
28 29
29

Cpuobulnicc ial.u thorities. It shall: on a general policy statement.
(-2 e)x Uampoinne t hape peexaplisr yo no fr etghiios ndaela adnlidn ec,o aunndc ial fetleerc tion Voting shall take place not less than 48 (forty-eight)
edsistapbultiessh;i ng the failure of the President of the hours after the vote of no confidence has been
R- geipvueb fliicn atlo rauclitn, gthse o Pnr easpipdeeanlts oafg tahine sNt faitnioanl al requested.
Ajusdsgeemmbelnyt sm paays hseimd sbeyl fl oewnaecrt ctohuer ltasw in. cases of A vote of no confidence shall be passed by an
(a3d)m Linawistsr asthiavlel be published in the Official Gazette of absolute majority of the members of the National
tdhiesp Ruetepsu; blic in English and French. Assembly.
- examine, any other disputes expressly devolving Only votes against a vote of confidence shall be
Auprtoincl eit 3b2y law. counted.
The President of Republic may, at his request, (2) The National Assembly may question the
aAdrdtircelses 4 t1h e National Assembly, the Senate or the two responsibility of the Government through a motion of
HThoeu saeusd mit ebeetnincgh isnh aclol nbger ecsosm. Hpeet emnat yto a clsoon tsreonld a nd censure. Such motion may be admissible only when it
mrueles soang epsu tbol itch aecmc;o buuntt sn, oa ss uwcehl la dasd roens st hoors me eosfs paugbe lic is signed by at last one-third of the members of
manady sbeem di-epbuabtelidc ienn hteisrp prriseesse.n ce. the National Assembly. Voting shall take place not
It shall: less than 48 (forty-eight) hours after the motion has
A- grtiivcele f i3n3a l rulings on final judgements passed lower been tabled. A motion of censure shall be passed by a
Tauhdei tP criomuret sM; inister and the other members of two third majority of the members of the National
G- eoxvaemrnimnee nant ysh oatlhl ehra mvea tatcecrse sesx tpor ePsasrllyi admeveonltv ainndg may Assembly. Only votes in favour of a motion of
puaprotnic iipt abtye lianw i.t s deliberations. censure shall be counted.
Where a motion of censure is rejected, its signatories
AArrttiiccllee 3442 may not propose a new motion before a period of
((11)) ATht eth oer gseasnsiizoanti odnu,r ifnugn cwtihoinchin tgh,e c foimnapnocseit bioilnl aisn d one year except as provided for in paragraph (4)
cdountiseisd eorfe tdh,e t hSeu pPrreimmee MCoinuirstt aenr dsh tahlel bperenscehnets t oit the below.
Ncoamtiopnriasle sA, stsheem cbolnyd tihtieo nGso fvoerr rnemfeernritn'sg e mcoantotemrsi ct,o (4) The Prime Minister may, after the deliberations of
fthineamn caisa lw, seollc aiasl tahned p crouclteudrualr ep raopgprlaicmamblee. before them the Council of Ministers, commit the
(s2h)a lTl hbee Plariidm de oMwinn ibsyte lra mwa. y, after the deliberations of responsibility of the Government before the National
t(h2e) TChoeu nocrigla onfi zMatiinoins,t efrusn, cctoiomnminigt ,t hceo mrepsopsointisoinb ialintyd of Assembly on the adoption of a bill. In such case,
tdhuet iGeso ovfe rtnhme Cenotu brtesf oorfe A thpep eNaal taionnda jlu Adiscsieaml, bly on a the bill may be considered adopted, except where a
programme or, as the case may be, motion of censure tabled within the next 24
30 31
30

Council. ponu bal igce anuetrhaol rpitoileisc.y I ts tsahtaelml:e nt.
(2) Upon the expiry of this deadline, and after -V eoxtianmgi nshea allp ptaekaels p olanc ree ngoiot nleasl sa nthda cno 4u8n c(filo retlye-cetiigohnt )
establishing the failure of the President of the dhiosuprust easft;e r the vote of no confidence has been
Republic to act, the President of the National -r egqiuvees ftienda. l rulings on appeals against final
Assembly may himself enact the law. jAu dvgoetme oenf tnso p caossnefdid beyn cleo wshearl lc obuer ptsa sinse cda sbeys aonf
(3) Laws shall be published in the Official Gazette of aadbmsoilnuitset rmataivjoer ity of the members of the National
the Republic in English and French. dAissspeumtebsl;y .
-O enxlyam viontee,s aangya iontsht ear vdoistpe uotfe sc oenxfpirdeesnsclye dsheavlol lbvein g
Article 32 ucopuonnt eitd b. y law.
The President of Republic may, at his request, (2) The National Assembly may question the
address the National Assembly, the Senate or the two Arerstpicolnes 4ib1i lity of the Government through a motion of
Houses meeting in congress. He may also send Tcehnes uaured.i tS buecnhc mh osthiaolnl bmea cyo bmep aedtemnits stoib cleo notnrolyl awnhde n it
messages to them; but no such address or message risu lsei gonne dp ubbyl iact alcacsto ounnets-,t haisr dw oefll tahse omne tmhobseer so of fp ublic
may be debated in his presence. athned Nseamtioi-npaul bAliscs eemntberlyp.r iVseost.i ng shall take place not
Ilet sssh athlla:n 48 (forty-eight) hours after the motion has
Article 33 -b egeivne t afbinleadl .r uAli nmgost ioonn foinf acle jnusdugreem sheanltls bpea spsaesds eldo wbeyr a
The Prime Minister and the other members of atwudoi tt hciordu rmtsa; jority of the members of the National
Government shall have access to Parliament and may -A esxseammbinlye .a Onyn loyt hveort ems aintt efrasv eoxupr roefs sal ym doetivoonl voifn g
participate in its deliberations. ucepnosnu irte bsyh alallw b.e counted.
Where a motion of censure is rejected, its signatories
Article 34 Amratyic nleo t4 2p ropose a new motion before a period of
(1) At the session during which the finance bill is (o1n)e T yheea ro ergxacnepizta atiso pnr,o fvuindcetdio fnoirn gin, cpoamrapgoraspithio (n4 )a nd
considered, the Prime Minister shall present to the dbueltoiews .o f the Supreme Court and the benches it
National Assembly the Government's economic, c(4o)m Tphreis ePsr,i mthee Mcoinndisitteior nms afyo,r arfetfeerr rthineg d melaibtteerrast itoon s of
financial, social and cultural programme. tthheem C oaus nwceill lo af sM thine ipstreorcse, dcuorme mapitp tlhicea ble before them
(2) The Prime Minister may, after the deliberations of srehsapllo bnesi lbaiildit yd oowf tnh be yG loavwe.r nment before the National
the Council of Ministers, commit the responsibility of (A2s)s Temheb loyr goann tihzaet iaodno,p ftuionnc toiof nai nbgil,l .c oInm spuocshit icoans ea,n d
the Government before the National Assembly on a dthuet ibeisl lo mf tahye bCeo cuorntss iodfe Arepdp aedaol patnedd ,j uedxicceipalt, where a
programme or, as the case may be, motion of censure tabled within the next 24
30 31
31

p(tuwbelinct yafuotuhro)r ihtoieusr.s I its s phaaslls:e d under the conditions repercussions on the future of the Nation and
-p reoxvaimdeinde f oarp pine athlse o pnr erceegdioinnga lp aanrdag croaupnhc. il election national. institutions.
d(5is)p Wuthees;r e the National Assembly adopts a motion of This shall apply in particular to:
-c egnivsuer fei noarl prauslsinegs sa ovno taep poef anlos acgoanifnidste nficnea,l the (a) bills, to organize public authorities or to amend
jPurdimgeem Menintsis ptears ssehda lbl yte lnodweer rt hceo urertssi ginn actaiosens o off t he the Constitution;
aGdomvienrinsmtraetnitv teo the President of the Republic. (b) bills to ratify international agreements or treaties
d(6is)p Tuhtees P; resident of the Republic may re-appoint the having particularly important consequences;
-P reixmaem Minien, iasnteyr oatnhde ra sdkis hpiumte tso e fxoprrmes as lnye dwe volving (c) certain reform bills relating to the law on persons
uGpoovne rint mbye nlat.w . and property.
(2) Such bills shall be adopted by a majority of votes
AArrttiiccllee 4315 cast.
T(1h)e T ahued Pita brelinacmhe snht aslhl ablel ccoonmtrpoelt eGnot vtoer cnomnetrnotl a acntido n (3) The referendum procedure shall be laid down by
rthurleo uognh p ourballi co ra cwcroitutnents ,q ause swtieolnl sa sa nodn bthyo sseet toinf gp uubpl ic law.
acnodm smeimttie-epsu obfl iicn eqnutieryrp wrisitehs .s pecific terms of
Irte fsehraelnl:c e. PART V
-( 2g)i vTeh efi nGaol vreurlninmges notn s hfianlal,l sjuubdjgeecmt teon ttsh ep aimsspeedr alotiwveesr Judicial Power
aouf dniat tcioonuartls d; efence, the security of the State or the
-s eecxraemcyi noef acnriym oitnhaelr i nmvaetstetirgsa etixopnr,e fsuslryn idshev aonlyv ing Article 37
uexppolna nita btiyo nlasw a.n d information to Parliament. (1) Justice shall be administered In the territory of the
(3) During each ordinary session, a special sitting Republic in the name of the people of Cameroon.
Ashratilcl lbee 4 s2e t aside each week for question time. (2) Judicial power shall be exercised by the Supreme
(1) The organization, functioning, composition and Court, Courts of Appeal and Tribunals. The
dAurttiiecsle o 3f 6t he Supreme Court and the benches it Judicial Power shall be independent of the executive
c(1o)m Tphreis ePsr,e tshidee cnot nodfi ttihoen Rs efopru rbelfice rmrinayg, mafattetre rs to and legislative powers. Magistrates of the bench
tchoenmsu altsi nwge wll iaths tthhee pPrroecseiddeunrte oafp tphleic Cabolnes btietufotiroen tahle m shall, in the discharge of their duties, be governed
sChoaulln bciel ,l athide dPorewsnid beyn tl aowf t.h e National Assembly and only by the law and their conscience:
(th2e) TPhrees iodregnatn oizfa tthioen S, efnuantcet,i osunbinmgi, tc toom ap roesfietrieonnd aunmd (3) The President of the Republic shall guarantee the
danuyti erse foofr mth eb iCllo wurhtsic ohf, Aalpthpoeuagl ha nndo rjmudailcliya lr,e served to independence of judicial power. He shall appoint
the Legislative Power, could have profound members of the bench and for the legal department.
32 33
32

(twentyfour) hours is passed under the conditions preupbelricc uasustihoonrsi toiens t. hIet sfhuatullr:e of the Nation and
provided for in the preceding paragraph. -n aetxioamnailn. ei nasptpiteuatilos nosn. regional and council election
(5) Where the National Assembly adopts a motion of dTihsipsu sthesa;l l apply in particular to:
censure or passes a vote of no confidence, the -( ag)i vbeil lfsi,n taol orurglianngisz eo np uabplpieca alus tahgoariintisets f oinra tlo amend
Prime Minister shall tender the resignation of the jthude gCeomnesntittsu ptiaosns;e d by lower courts in cases of
Government to the President of the Republic. a(bd)m biinlliss ttroa triavtei fy international agreements or treaties
(6) The President of the Republic may re-appoint the dhiasvpiuntge sp;a rticularly important consequences;
Prime Minister and ask him to form a new -( ce)x caemrtianien, raenfyo romth beirl ldsi srepluatteins ge xtop rtehses llya wd eovno lpveirnsgo ns
Government. uanpdo np rito pbeyr ltayw. .
(2) Such bills shall be adopted by a majority of votes
Article 35 Acarstitc.le 41
(1) The Parliament shall control Government action T(3h)e T ahued rite fbeernecnhd usmha lpl rboec ecdoumrep estheanltl tboe cloanidtr dool wannd b y
through oral or written questions and by setting up rlauwle. on public accounts, as well as on those of public
committees of inquiry with specific terms of and semi-public enterprises.
reference. IPt AshRaTll :V
(2) The Government shall, subject to the imperatives -J ugdivicei afiln Paol wruelrin gs on final judgements passed lower
of national defence, the security of the State or the audit courts;
secrecy of criminal investigation, furnish any -A ertxiacmle i3n7e any other matters expressly devolving
explanations and information to Parliament. u(1p)o Jnu istt ibcye lsahwal.l be administered In the territory of the
(3) During each ordinary session, a special sitting Republic in the name of the people of Cameroon.
shall be set aside each week for question time. A(2r)t iJculed i4c2ia l power shall be exercised by the Supreme
(C1o)u Trth, eC oorugratns iozfa tAiopnp, efauln acntido nTirnibgu, ncoalms.p Toshieti on and
Article 36 dJuudtiiecsi aol fP tohwe eSru sphraelml eb eC ionudretp aenndd ethnet obfe nthceh eesx eitc utive
(1) The President of the Republic may, after caonmd lpergisiselsa,t tihvee cpoonwdeirtiso. nMs afgoirs rterafetersri onfg tmhea tbteernsc hto
consulting with the President of the Constitutional tshheamll, ains wtheel ld aissc thhaer gpero ocfe tdhuerier adpuptileics,a bblee gboevfeorrnee tdh em
Council, the President of the National Assembly and sohnalyll bbye tlhaied l adwow ann db yth leaiwr c. onscience:
the President of the Senate, submit to a referendum ((32)) TThhee Porrgesaindieznatt ioofn ,t hfeu nRcetipounbinligc, schoamll pgousairtiaonnte aen tdh e
any reform bill which, although normally reserved to dinudtieepse onfd ethnec eC oofu jrutsd oicfi aAl pppoewale ra.n Hd ej usdhiaclila al,p point
the Legislative Power, could have profound members of the bench and for the legal department.
32 33
33

Hpueb slihca lalu btheo arsistiiesste. dIt isnh tahlils: task by the Higher Judicial public authorities. It shall:
C- eoxuanmciiln we haipcphe ashlsa loln g rivege ihoinmal iatsn do pcionuionnc iol ne laelclt ion - examine appeals on regional and council election
ndoismpuinteasti;o ns for the bench and on disciplinary action disputes;
a- ggaivines tf ijnuadli cruialiln agnsd o lne gaaplp oefaflisc eargsa. iTnshte f oinragla nization - give final rulings on appeals against final
ajunddg feumnecntitosn pinasgs oedf tbhye lHowigehre cr oJuurdtisc iinal c Casoeusn ocfil shall judgements passed by lower courts in cases of
badem deinfiinsterda tbivye l aw. administrative
disputes; disputes;
A- ertxiacmle i3n8e , any other disputes expressly devolving - examine, any other disputes expressly devolving
(u1p)o Tn hiet bSyu plarwem. e Court shall be the highest court of upon it by law.
the State in legal and administrative matters as Well
aAsr tiinc lteh e4 1a ppraisal of accounts. Article 41
(T2h)e I ta ushdaitl lb ceonmchp rsihsael:l be competent to control and The audit bench shall be competent to control and
-r ual ej uodni cpiaulb bliecn acchc;o unts, as well as on those of public rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public
-a nadn saedmmii-npiusbtrlaicti veen tbeerpnrcihs;e s. and semi-public enterprises.
-It a snh aaluld: it bench. It shall:
- give final rulings on final judgements passed lower - give final rulings on final judgements passed lower
Aaurdtiictl ceo 3u9r ts; audit courts;
T- ehxea jmudinicei aaln bye ontchhe rs hmaallt tgeirvse e fxipnraels rsulyli ndgesv oolnv:i ng - examine any other matters expressly devolving
-u paopnp eiat lbsy a clacwep. ted by law against final rulings given upon it by law.
by the various courts and tribunals of the judicial
sAyrsttiecmle ;4 2 Article 42
-(j1u)d Tgheem oerngt'asn pizaastsieodn,, bfyu nthctei olonwinegr, ccooumrptso osift itohne and (1) The organization, functioning, composition and
jduudtiiecsia ol fs ythsete Smu pthraetm hea vCeo buertc aonmde t hfien able innc hcaesse ist where duties of the Supreme Court and the benches it
tchoem apprpisliecsa, ttihoen coofn tdhiet iloanws ifso rc hreaflelernrignegd m, atters to comprises, the conditions for referring matters to
-th aelml m aast tweresl le axsp trhees splyro dceevdoulrvei napgp ulpicoanb liet bbye floarwe .t hem them as well as the procedure applicable before them
shall be laid down by law. shall be laid down by law.
A(2r)t iTclhee 4 o0r ganization, functioning, composition and (2) The organization, functioning, composition and
Tduhteie asd omf itnhies tCraotiuvrets b oefn Achp spheaalll aenxda mjuidniec iaalll, the duties of the Courts of Appeal and judicial,
administrative disputes Involving the State and other
34 35
34

He shall be assisted in this task by the Higher Judicial ppuubblliicc aauutthhoorriittiieess.. IItt sshhaallll::
Council which shall give him its opinion on all -- eexxaammiinnee aappppeeaallss oonn rreeggiioonnaall aanndd ccoouunncciill eelleeccttiioonn
nominations for the bench and on disciplinary action ddiissppuutteess;;
against judicial and legal officers. The organization -- ggiivvee ffiinnaall rruulliinnggss oonn aappppeeaallss aaggaaiinnsstt ffiinnaall
and functioning of the Higher Judicial Council shall jjuuddggeemmeennttss ppaasssseedd bbyy lloowweerr ccoouurrttss iinn ccaasseess ooff
be defined by law. aaddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee
ddiissppuutteess;;
Article 38 -- eexxaammiinnee,, aannyy ootthheerr ddiissppuutteess eexxpprreessssllyy ddeevvoollvviinngg
(1) The Supreme Court shall be the highest court of uuppoonn iitt bbyy llaaww..
the State in legal and administrative matters as Well
as in the appraisal of accounts. AArrttiiccllee 4411
(2) It shall comprise: TThhee aauuddiitt bbeenncchh sshhaallll bbee ccoommppeetteenntt ttoo ccoonnttrrooll aanndd
- a judicial bench; rruullee oonn ppuubblliicc aaccccoouunnttss,, aass wweellll aass oonn tthhoossee ooff ppuubblliicc
- an administrative bench; aanndd sseemmii--ppuubblliicc eenntteerrpprriisseess..
- an audit bench. IItt sshhaallll::
-- ggiivvee ffiinnaall rruulliinnggss oonn ffiinnaall jjuuddggeemmeennttss ppaasssseedd lloowweerr
Article 39 aauuddiitt ccoouurrttss;;
The judicial bench shall give final rulings on: -- eexxaammiinnee aannyy ootthheerr mmaatttteerrss eexxpprreessssllyy ddeevvoollvviinngg
- appeals accepted by law against final rulings given uuppoonn iitt bbyy llaaww..
by the various courts and tribunals of the judicial
system; AArrttiiccllee 4422
-judgement's passed, by the lower courts of the ((11)) TThhee oorrggaanniizzaattiioonn,, ffuunnccttiioonniinngg,, ccoommppoossiittiioonn aanndd
judicial system that have become final in cases where dduuttiieess ooff tthhee SSuupprreemmee CCoouurrtt aanndd tthhee bbeenncchheess iitt
the application of the law is challenged, ccoommpprriisseess,, tthhee ccoonnddiittiioonnss ffoorr rreeffeerrrriinngg mmaatttteerrss ttoo
- all matters expressly devolving upon it by law. tthheemm aass wweellll aass tthhee pprroocceedduurree aapppplliiccaabbllee bbeeffoorree tthheemm
sshhaallll bbee llaaiidd ddoowwnn bbyy llaaww..
Article 40 ((22)) TThhee oorrggaanniizzaattiioonn,, ffuunnccttiioonniinngg,, ccoommppoossiittiioonn aanndd
The administrative bench shall examine all the dduuttiieess ooff tthhee CCoouurrttss ooff AAppppeeaall aanndd jjuuddiicciiaall,,
administrative disputes Involving the State and other
34 35
35

apdumbliinci saturtahtiovreit iaensd. Ilto swhearl la: udit benches as well as the Part VII
c- oenxdaimtiionnes afpopr eraelfse rornin rge gmioanttaelr sa ntod tchoeumn cainl de ltehcet ion The Constitutional Council
pdrisopcuetdeusr;e applicable before them shall be laid down
b- yg ilvaew f.i nal rulings on appeals against final Article 46
judgements passed by lower courts in cases of The Constitutional Council shall have jurisdiction in
PadAmRinTi sVtrIa tive matters pertaining to the Constitution. It shall rule
Tdirsepautiteess ;a nd International Agreements on the constitutionality of laws. It shall be the organ
- examine, any other disputes expressly devolving regulating the functioning of the institutions.
Auprtoincl eit 4b3y law.
The President of the Republic shall negotiate and Article 47
rAarttiifcyl etr 4ea1t ies and international agreements. Treaties (1) The Constitutional Council shall give a final
aTnhde ianutedrint abteinocnha ls ahgarlel ebme ecnotms pfaeitleinngt two ictohnintr tohle a anrde a ruling on:
oruf lceo omnp peutebnlicce a ocfc othuen tLse, gaiss lwateilvl ea sP oown ethr oasse d oeff ipnuebdl ic - the constitutionality of laws, treaties and
iann dA srteimclie- p2u6b alibco evnet eshrparlils bees. submitted to Parliament international agreements;
fIot rs haaultlh: orization to ratify. - the constitutionality of the standing orders of the
- give final rulings on final judgements passed lower National Assembly and the Senate 'prior to their
Aaurdtiictl ceo 4u4r ts; implementation;
W- ehxearme itnhee aCnoyn ostthiteurt imonaattle Crso euxnpcriel sfsinlyd sd eav porlovvinisgi on of - conflict of powers between State institutions;
au ptroena tiyt boyr olafw a.n international agreement between the State and the Regions, and between the
unconstitutional, authorization to ratify and the Regions.
rAarttiifciclea t4io2n of the said treaty or agreement shall be (2) Matters may be referred to the Constitutional
d(1e)f eTrhreed o urgnatinl itzhaet iCono,n fsutintucttiioonn iinsg a, mcoemndpeods.i tion and Council by the President of the Republic, the
duties of the Supreme Court and the benches it President of the National Assembly, the President of
Acormticplrei s4e5s , the conditions for referring matters to the Senate, one-third of the members of the National
Dthuelmy aaps pwroelvle ads othr er aptrifoiceedd turerea taiepsp laincdab ilnet ebrenfaotrieo nthael m Assembly or one-third of the Senators.
ashgarelle bmee lnatisd s dhoawll,n f oblylo lwawin. g their publication, Presidents of regional executives may refer matters to
o(2v)e Trrhidee o nrgatainoinzaalt iloanw, sf,u pnrcotvioidneindg t,h ceo omthpeors iptaiortny and the Constitutional Council whenever the interests
idmutpileesm oefn tthse t hCeo suaritds otrfe Aatpyp oera la garnede mjuednict.i al, of their Regions are at stake.
36 37
36

administrative and lower audit benches as well as the Ppuabrlti cV aIuI thorities. It shall:
conditions for referring matters to them and the T- hexe aCmoinnset iatuptpieoanlasl oCno ruengcioiln al and council election
procedure applicable before them shall be laid down disputes;
by law. A- grtiivcele f i4n6a l rulings on appeals against final
Tjuhdeg eCmonensttist uptaiossneadl Cbyo ulonwciel rs hcoalulr htsa vine cjuasriessd oicft ion in
PART VI madamttienriss tprearttiavien ing to the Constitution. It shall rule
Treaties and International Agreements odnis pthuete cso; nstitutionality of laws. It shall be the organ
r-e egxualmatiinneg, tahney f uonthcetiro dniisnpgu otefs t ehxe pirnesstsitluyt idoenvso. lving
Article 43 upon it by law.
The President of the Republic shall negotiate and Article 47
ratify treaties and international agreements. Treaties (A1r)t iTclhee 4 C1o nstitutional Council shall give a final
and international agreements failing within the area rTuhlien agu odnit: bench shall be competent to control and
of competence of the Legislative Power as defined -r utlhee ocno npsutbitluicti oacncaoliutyn tosf, alasw wse, ltlr eaast oiens tahnods e of public
in Article 26 above shall be submitted to Parliament ianntde rsneamtiio-npaulb aligcr eeenmteerpnrtsis; es.
for authorization to ratify. -I tt hshea cllo:n stitutionality of the standing orders of the
N- gaitvioen failn aAl srsuelminbglsy oann dfi nthael jSuedngaetme 'epnrtiso rp atos stehde ilro wer
Article 44 iamudpilte cmoeunrttast;i on;
Where the Constitutional Council finds a provision of -- ceoxnamfliicnte o afn pyo owtheresr bmeatwtteeresn e Sxtpartees isnlyst idteuvtioolnvsi;n g
a treaty or of an international agreement bueptowne iet nb yth lea wSt.a te and the Regions, and between the
unconstitutional, authorization to ratify and the Regions.
ratification of the said treaty or agreement shall be (A2r)t iMclea t4te2r s may be referred to the Constitutional
deferred until the Constitution is amended. C(1o)u Tnhceil obryg athneiz Patrieosnid, efunnt cotfi othnein Rge, pcuobmlipco, stihtieo n and
Pduretiseids eonft tohfe tShuep Nreamtioe nCaol uArst saenmdb tlhye, btheen cPhreessi idte nt of
Article 45 tchoem Spernisaetse,, tohnee c-tohnirddit ioofn tsh efo mr reemfebrerrisn go fm thatet eNrsa ttioo nal
Duly approved or ratified treaties and international Athsesmem asb lwy eolrl aosn eth-teh pirrdo coefd tuhree S aepnpaltiocrasb.l e before them
agreements shall, following their publication, Pshreaslli dbeen ltasi do fd roewgino nbayl leaxwe.c utives may refer matters to
override national laws, provided the other party t(h2e) TChoen sotrigtuatnioiznaatli oCno, ufnucniclt wiohneinnge,v ceor mthpeo isnitteiorens atsn d
implements the said treaty or agreement. odfu ttiheesi ro fR tehgei oCnosu arrtes oatf sAtapkpee.a l and judicial,
36 37
37

(p3u)b Lliacw asu tahso writeilels a. sI tt rsehaatlile:s and international Council by the President of the Republic, the
a- gerxeaemmiennet sa pmpaeya,l sp orino rr etog itohneailr aennda cctomuenncti,l beele rcetfieornr ed President of the National Assembly the President of
tdoi stphuet eCso; nstitutional Council by the President of the the Senate, one-third of the members of the National
R- geipvueb fliicn,a tlh reu lPinregssi doenn at popfe tahles Nagaatiionnsta fl iAnasls embly, the Assembly or one-third of the Senators.
Pjurdegsiedmenent tosf pthases Sede nbayte l,o owneer- tchoiurdrt so fi.n t hcaes mese mofb ers of
tahdem Ninaitsitornaatilv Ae ssembly, one-third of the Senators, Article 49
odris tphuet ePsr;e sidents of regional executives pursuant to In any case, the Constitutional Council shall give
t-h eex parmoivnies,i oannsy o oft hpearr adgirsappuhte (s2 e) xapbroevsesl.y devolving ruling within a period of 15 (fifteen) days once a
Eupnoanct imt ebnyt ldaewa.d lines shall cease to lapse once an matter has been referred to it.
instrument has been referred to the Constitutional However, at the request of the President of the
CArotuicnlcei l4. 1 Republic, such time-limit may be reduced to 8 (eight)
(T4h)e T ahued Cit obnesntcithu tsihoanlal lb Ce ocuonmciple sthenaltl taod cvoicnetr oinl amnadt ters days.
fraulllei nogn upnudbelric i tasc jcuoruisndtisc, taiosn w. ell as on those of public
and semi-public enterprises. Article 50
AItr sthicallel :4 8 (1) Rulings of the Constitutional Council shall not be
(-1 g)i vTeh efi nCaoln rsutliitnugtiso noanl fCinoaul njcuidl gsehmalel netns spuarses tehde lower subject to appeal. They shall be binding on all
raeugduitl acroituyr tosf; presidential elections, parliamentary public, administrative, military and judicial
e- leexcatimoninse a anndy r eoftehreern mduamtte orsp eerxaptrioesnssl.y I td sehvaolllv pinrogc laim authorities, as well as, on all natural persons- and
tuhpeo rne situ bltys ltahwer.e of. corporate bodies.
(2) Any challenges in respect of the regularity of one (2) A provision that has been declared
oAfr ttihcele e 4le2c tions provided for in the preceding unconstitutional may not be enacted or implemented.
p(1a)r aTghrea pohr gmaanyiz batei obnro, ufugnhct tbioenfoinrge ,t choe mCpoonssittiitounti oanndal
Cduotuiensc iolf b tyh ea nSyu pcraenmdied Catoeu, rpto alintdic tahl ep baretnyc thheast it Article 51
pcoarmtipcripisaetse,d t hine tchoen edlieticotniosn f oinr rthefee crroinnsgt imtuaetntecrys to (1) The Constitutional Council shall comprise 11
cthoenmce arns ewde ollr aasn tyh pe eprrsoocne dacutrien ga papsl iGcaobvleer nbmefeonret athgeemnt (eleven) members designated for an eventually
asht athlle b eel elcatiido dno. wn by law. renewable term of office of 6 (six) years.
((32)) AThney ocrhgaalnleinzagteiso nin, fruenspcteicotn oinf gth, ec ormegpuolsairtiitoyn o afn ad These members shall be chosen from among
rdeufteireesn odfu tmhe m Caoyu brtes roeff eArrpepde atol athned Cjuodnisctiiatlu, tional personalities of established professional renown.
38 39
38

(3) Laws as well as treaties and international Cpuobulnicc ial ubtyh othrieti Pesr.e sIti dsehnatl lo: f the Republic, the
agreements may, prior to their enactment, be referred P- reexsaimdeinnte oafp tpheea Nls aotnio rneagl iAonsasel manbdl yc othuen cPirle esliedcetniot no f
to the Constitutional Council by the President of the tdhisep Suetensa;t e, one-third of the members of the National
Republic, the President of the National Assembly, the A- gsisveem fbinlya lo rru olinneg-sth oirnd a opfp tehaels S aegnaaitnosrts .f inal
President of the Senate, one-third of. the members of judgements passed by lower courts in cases of
the National Assembly, one-third of the Senators, Aadrmticinlei s4tr9a tive
or the Presidents of regional executives pursuant to Idnis apnuyte csa; se, the Constitutional Council shall give
the provisions of paragraph (2) above. r-u elxinagm winieth, iann ya poethrieord d oisfp 1u5te (sf iefxtepernes) sdlyay dse ovnoclvei na g
Enactment deadlines shall cease to lapse once an mupaottne rit h bays lbaewe.n referred to it.
instrument has been referred to the Constitutional However, at the request of the President of the
Council. RAretpiculbel i4c1, such time-limit may be reduced to 8 (eight)
(4) The Constitutional Council shall advice in matters dTahyes a. udit bench shall be competent to control and
falling under its jurisdiction. rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public
Aanrdti csleem 5i0-p ublic enterprises.
Article 48 (It1 )s hRaulll:i ngs of the Constitutional Council shall not be
(1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the s- ugbivjeec tf itnoa al prupleianlg. sT ohne yfi snhaal ljlu bdeg ebminednintsg p oans saeldl lower
regularity of presidential elections, parliamentary pauudbilti cc,o audrmts;i nistrative, military and judicial
elections and referendum operations. It shall proclaim a- uetxhaomriitniees a, nays wotehlel ra sm, aotnte arsll enxapturersasl lpye drseovnoslv- ianngd
the results thereof. cuopropno irta tbey b loadwi.e s.
(2) Any challenges in respect of the regularity of one (2) A provision that has been declared
of the elections provided for in the preceding uAnrtciocnles t4it2u tional may not be enacted or implemented.
paragraph may be brought before the Constitutional (1) The organization, functioning, composition and
Council by any candidate, political party that Adurttiicelse o 5f1 t he Supreme Court and the benches it
participated in the election in the constituency (c1o)m Tphreis eCso, nthstei tcuotinodniatilo Cnos ufonrc irle sfherarliln cgo mmaptrtiesres 1to1
concerned or any person acting as Government agent (theelemv eans) wmeelml abse trhse d persoigcneadtuerde faoprp alnic aebvleen tbueaflolyre them
at the election. rsehnaellw baeb llaei dte rdmow onf obfyf ilcaew o. f 6 (six) years.
(3) Any challenges in respect of the regularity of a T(2h)e Tseh em oermgabneirzsa sthioanll, bfuen cchtioosneinn gfr,o cmom ampoosnitgio n and
referendum may be referred to the Constitutional pduertsieosn oalfi ttihees Cofo uesrttsa bolfi sAhepdp eparlo afensds ijoundaicl iraeln, own.
38 39
39

Tpuhbelyi cm auustth obrei toief sh. iIgth s hmaollr:a l integrity and proven
c- oemxapmetiennec aep. peals on regional and council election
(d2is) pMuteems;b ers of the Constitutional Council shall be
a- pgpivoein ftienda lb ryu tlhineg Ps roensi dapenpte aolfs tahgea Rinespt ufbinliacl. They
sjuhdaglle bmee dnetss ipgansasteedd bays floolwloewr cs:o urts in cases of
-a dthmreinei,s itnractliuvdei ng the President of the Council, by the
Pdirsepsuidteesn;t of the Republic;
-- tehxraeme ibnye ,t haen yP roetshiedre dnits opfu tthese eNxaptrieosnsally A dsesveomlvbilnyg
aufptoern ciot nbsyu llatawti.o n with the Bureau;
- three by the President of the Senate after
cAorntisculelt a4t1io n with the Bureau;
-T thwe oa ubdyi tt hbee nHcihg hsehra lJlu bdeic cioalm Cpoeutenncti lt.o control and
Bruelsei doens p tuhbel eicle avcecno umnetms, baesr ws pelrlo avsid oend tfhoors aeb oofv peu, blic
faonrdm seerm Pir-epsuibdleinct es notfe rtphrei sReesp. ublic shall be ex-officio
mIt esmhablle:r s of the Constitutional Council for life.
I-n g civaes ef ionfa la rtuieli,n tghse oPnr efsiindaeln jtu odfg ethmee Cntosn psatistsuetido nloawl er
Cauoduint cciol usrhtas;l l have the casting vote.
(-3 e)x Ianm tihnee eavneyn to othfe trh me datetaetrhs oexr preressigsnlya tdioevno olfv ian g
mupeomnb iet rb oyr l aanwy. other cause of incapacity or inability
duly established by the competent bodies provided
fAorrt ibcyle l a4w2 , a replacement shall be designated by the
c(1o)m Tpheete onrtg aauntihzoartiiotyn ,o fru bnocdtiyo ncoinngc,e crnoemdp aonsdit ion and
adpuptioeisn otefd t.h teo S cuopmrepmleete C tohue rtte armnd o tfh eo fbfiecnec.h es it
(c4o)m Mpreimsebse, rtsh eo fc othned iCtioonnsst iftourt iroenfaelr rCinogu nmcailt tsehrsa ltlo t ake
tthhee moa atsh wofe lolf afisc teh aes p lraoicde ddouwren a bpyp lliacwab blee fboerfeo re them
Pshaarllila bme elnati dm deoewtinng b iyn lcaown. gress.
((52)) TThhee dourgtiaensi zoaft mioenm, fbuenrc otifo tnhien gC, ocnosmtiptuotsioitnioanl and
Cduotuiensc iolf s thhael lC boeu irntsc oomf Apaptpibelael wanitdh jtuhdoisceia ol,f member
40
40

They must be of high moral integrity and proven opfu bGliocv aeurnthmoernitti,e os.f Imt sehmablle: r of Parliament or of the
competence. S- uexparemminee C aopupret.a lOs tohne rr eingcioonmapl aatnibdi lciotiuens cainl de lmecattitoenrs
(2) Members of the Constitutional Council shall be rdeilsaptuintegs ;t o the status of members, namely obligations,
appointed by the President of the Republic. They i-m gmivue nfiitnieasl raunldin pgrsi voinle agpepse sahlas lal gbaei nlasitd f idnoawl n by law.
shall be designated as follows: judgements passed by lower courts in cases of
- three, including the President of the Council, by the Aadrmticinlei s5tr2a tive
President of the Republic; Adi slpauwt essh;a ll lay down the organization and
- three by the President of the National Assembly f-u enxcatmioinnien,g a onfy tohteh Cero dnisstpituutteios neaxlp Creosusnlyc idl,e tvhoel ving
after consultation with the Bureau; cuopnodni tiito bnys lfaowr .r eferring matters to it as well as the
- three by the President of the Senate after procedure applicable before it.
consultation with the Bureau; Article 41
- two by the Higher Judicial Council. PTAheR aTu dVitI bIIe nch shall be competent to control and
Besides the eleven members provided for above, Truhlee Cono uprutb olfi cI macpceoaucnhtms,e anst well as on those of public
former Presidents of the Republic shall be ex-officio and semi-public enterprises.
members of the Constitutional Council for life. AItr sthicallel :5 3
In case of a tie, the President of the Constitutional (-1 g)i vTeh efi nCaolu rrutl oinfg ism opne aficnhaml ejundt gsehmalel nhtasv pea jsusreidsd liocwtioern ,
Council shall have the casting vote. ianu dreits pceocutr tosf; acts committed in the exercise of their
(3) In the event of the death or resignation of a f-u enxcatmioinnse taon tyry o: ther matters expressly devolving
member or any other cause of incapacity or inability -u pTohne iPt rbeys ildaewn.t of the Republic for high treason;
duly established by the competent bodies provided - The Prime Minister, members of government and
for by law, a replacement shall be designated by the pAerrtiscolnes 4 r2a nking as such and senior government
competent authority or body concerned and o(1ff)i Tcihaels o trog wanhiozamti opno,w feurnsc htiaovnei nbge,e cno dmepleogsaittieodn i ann d
appointed. to complete the term of office. pduurtiseusa onfc eth oef SAurptircelmese 1C0o aunrtd a 1n2d atbhoe vbee,n fcohre s it
(4) Members of the Constitutional Council shall take ccoonmsppriirsaecsy, tahgea icnosnt dthiteio snesc uforirt yre ofef rtrhine gS mtataet.t ers to
the oath of office as laid down by law before (th2e) mT haes Pwreelsli daes ntht eo fp trhoec eRdeuprue balpicp lsihcaalbll be eb ienfdoircet ethde m
Parliament meeting in congress. oshnalyll bbye tlhaeid N daotwionn ably A laswse.m bly and the Senate
(5) The duties of member of the Constitutional d(2e)c iTdhineg o trhgraonuizgaht iaonn ,i dfeunntcitciaoln vinogte, cboym oppoesni tbioanll oatn adn d
Council shall be incompatible with those of member bdyu taie fso oufr tfhifet hC mouarjtosr oitfy A opf ptheeailr a mnde mjubdeircsi.a l,
40 41
41

p(3u)b Alicc tasu ctohmormitiiettse. dI tb syh athlle: President of the Republic administered by councils elected under conditions
-in e xpaumrsiunaen caep poefa Alsr otinc lreesg 5io, n8a, l9 a anndd c 1o0u nacbiol veele schtiaolnl be laid down by law.
dcoisvpeurteeds ;b y immunity and he shall not be accountable The duty of the councils of regional and local
-f ogri vthee fmin aafl treurl tinhge se oxner acpispee oalfs h aigs afiunnsct tfiionnasl; authorities shall be to promote the economic, social,
judgements passed by lower courts in cases of health, educational, cultural and sports development
a(4d)m Tinhies torragtiavnei zation, composition and the conditions of the said authorities.
dunisdpeurt ewsh; ich matters shall be referred to as well as the (3) The State shall exercise supervisory powers over
-p reoxcaemduinree, aapnpyl ioctahbelre dbiesfpourtee sth eex Cproeusrstl yo fd evolving regional and local authorities, under conditions laid
uImpopne aict hbmy elanwt s. hall be laid down by law down by law.
(4) The State shall ensure the harmonious
APrAtiRclTe 4IX1 development of all the regional and local authorities
TThhee Eaucdoint obmenicc ha nsdh aSlol cbiea lc oCmoupnetceinl t to control and on the basis of national solidarity, regional potentials
rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public and inter-regional balance.
aAnrdti csleem 5i4-p ublic enterprises. (5) The organization, functioning and financial
ITt hsehrael ls:h all be an Economic and Social Council regulations of regional and local authorities shall be
-w ghiovsee f cinoaml pruolsiintigosn o, nd uftiineasl ajunddg oermgaennitzsa ptiaosns esdh alollw beer defined by law.
alauiddi td coowunr tbs;y law. (6) The rules and regulations governing councils shall
- examine any other matters expressly devolving be defined by law.
uPpAoRn Tit Xby law.
Regional and Local Authorities Article 56
Article 42 (1) The State shall transfer to Regions, under
(A1r)t iTclhee 5 o5r ganization, functioning, composition and conditions laid down by law, jurisdiction in areas
d(1u)t iRese goifo tnhael Sanudp rleomcael Cauotuhrot raintide st hoef btheen cRheepsu ibt lic necessary for their economic, social, health,
cshoamllp criosmesp, rtihsee cRoengdioitniosn asn fdo Cr roeufnercriilns.g matters to educational, cultural and sports development.
tAhnemy o atsh ewr eslul cahs athueth porroictye dsuhraell a bpep lcirceaabtleed bbeyf olarew t.h em (2) The law shall define:
s(2h)a lRl ebgei olaniadl daonwd nlo bcya ll aawut.h orities shall be public law - the sharing of powers between the State and
(c2o)r pTohrea toer bgoandiizeas.t iTonh,e yfu snhcatlilo nhianvge, acdommipnoisstirtaiotinv ea nd Regions in the areas of competence so transferred.
danudti efsin oafn tchiael C aouutorntso omf yA ipnp tehael manadn ajugdemicieanlt, of (3) The resources of the Regions.
regional and local interests. They shall be freely (4) The land and property of each region.
42 43
42

(3) Acts committed by the President of the Republic apdumbliinci astuetrheodr ibtiye sc.o Iut nschialsll :e lected under conditions
in pursuance of Articles 5, 8, 9 and 10 above shall be l-a eidx admoiwnne abpyp leaawls. on regional and council election
covered by immunity and he shall not be accountable Tdihsep udtuetsy; of the councils of regional and local
for them after the exercise of his functions; a- ugtihvoer iftiineasl srhualilnl gbse oton parpopmeaoltse atghaei necsto fnionmali c, social,
hjuedagltehm, eednutsc aptaisosneadl ,b cyu lltouwraelr acnodu rstpso irnt sc daseevse loofp ment
(4) The organization, composition and the conditions oadf mthien issatirda taivueth orities.
under which matters shall be referred to as well as the (d3is) pTuhtees S; tate shall exercise supervisory powers over
procedure applicable before the Court of r-e egxiaomnailn aen, dan lyo coatlh aeur tdhiosrpiutiteess, euxnpdreers scloyn ddeitvioonlvsi nlagi d
Impeachment shall be laid down by law duopwonn ibt yb yla lwaw. .
(4) The State shall ensure the harmonious
PART IX dAervtieclloep 4m1e nt of all the regional and local authorities
The Economic and Social Council oTnh eth aeu bdaits bise onfc hn asthioalnla bl es ocloidmapreittye,n rte tgoi ocnoanlt rpool taenndti als
arunlde ionnte pr-urbelgicio ancacl obuanlatsn,c aes. well as on those of public
Article 54 (a5n)d T sheem oi-rpguabnliizca etinotne,r pfurinscetsi.o ning and financial
There shall be an Economic and Social Council rIet gshualallt:i ons of regional and local authorities shall be
whose composition, duties and organization shall be d- egfiivnee dfi nbayl lrauwli.n gs on final judgements passed lower
laid down by law. (a6u)d Tit hceo ururtlse;s and regulations governing councils shall
b- ee xdaemfiinneed abnyy loatwh.e r matters expressly devolving
PART X upon it by law.
Regional and Local Authorities Article 56
(A1r)t iTclhee 4 S2t ate shall transfer to Regions, under
Article 55 c(1o)n Tdihtieo onrsg laanidiz daotiwonn, bfuyn lcatwio,n jiunrgis, dciocmtiopno sinit iaorne aasn d
(1) Regional and local authorities of the Republic ndeuctieesss aorfy t hfoe rS tuhperire meceo Cnoomuritc ,a nsodc tihael, bheenaclthhe,s it
shall comprise Regions and Councils. ecdoumcpartiisoensa, lt,h ceu cltounradli taionnds s fpoorr trse fdeervrienlgo pmmaettnetr.s to
Any other such authority shall be created by law. (th2e) mT haes lwawel ls ahsa ltlh dee pfirnoec:e dure applicable before them
(2) Regional and local authorities shall be public law -s hthalel sbhea lrainidg doofw pno wbeyr lsa bwe.t ween the State and
corporate bodies. They shall have administrative R(2e)g Tiohnes o irng tahnei zaarteioasn ,o ffu cnocmtiopnetinengc, ec osmo ptroasnistifoenrr eadn.d
and financial autonomy in the management of (d3u)t iTesh eo fr ethsoeu Crcoeusr tosf otfh eA Rppeegaiol nasn.d judicial,
regional and local interests. They shall be freely (4) The land and property of each region.
42 43
43

pAurtbilcilce a5u7t horities. It shall: the same time as himself from among the members of
-( 1e)x Tamhei noer gaapnpse aolfs tohne rReeggioionna ls ahnadll cboeu tnhcei lR eelgeicotinoanl the Council. The Regional Bureau shall reflect the
dCiosupnucteils ;a nd the President of the Regional Council. sociological components of the Region.
-T ghiev Re efigniaoln raul lCinogusn ocnil aapnpde tahlse aPgraeisnidste nfitn oafl the (4) Members of Parliament of the Region shall sit in
jRuedggieomnaeln Ctso puanscsield s hbayl ll ofuwnecrt icoonu rwtsi tihni nc athsees of the Regional Council in an advisory capacity.
afrdammienwisotrrakt iovfe powers transferred to the Region by the
dSitsapteu.tes; Article 58
-(2 e)x Tamhei nRee, gainoyn aolt hCeor udnicspilu sthesa lel xbper ethsesl yd edliebveorlavtiinvge (1) A delegate, appointed by the President of the
uorpgoann i ot fb yth lea wR.e gion. Regional Councillors whose Republic shall represent the State in the Region. In
term of office shall be 5 (five) years shall comprise : this capacity, he shall be responsible for national
A- drtiivcilsei o4n1a l delegates elected by indirect universal interests, administrative control, ensuring compliance
Tsuhfef raaugdei;t bench shall be competent to control and with laws and regulations, as well as maintaining law
r- urleep orens epnutbaltiicv easc coofu tnratsd,i taiso nwael lrlu alse rosn e tlhecotseed o bfy p tuhbeliirc and order. He shall, under the authority of the
apneedr sse.mi-public enterprises. Government, supervise and co-ordinate civil State
ITt hseh aRlle:g ional Council shall reflect the various services in the Region.
-s ogciivoel ofginicaal lr ucloinmgpso onne nftisn aolf jtuhdeg Remegeinotns. passed lower (2) He shall exercise the supervisory authority of the
aTuhdei ts ycostuermts ;o f election, number, proportion by State over the Region.
-c aetxeagmoriyn,e r aunleys ogtohvere rmniantgte rins eelxigpirbeislsitlyy, devolving
uinpcoonm ipt abtyib lialwiti.e s Article 59
and emoluments of Regional Councillors shall be laid (1) The Regional Council may be suspended by the
Adortwicnl eb 4y2 l aw. President of the Republic where such organ:
((13)) TThhee oRreggainoinzaalt iCono,u fnucnilc stihoanliln bge, hcoeamdpeods bityio ann a nd - carries out activities contrary to the constitution;
dinudtiiegse noef othfe t hSeu pRreegmioen C eoleucrtt eadn dfr othme abmenocnhge si tist - undermines the security of the State or public law
cmoemmpbreisres sf,o trh teh ceo lnifdei toiof nths ef oCro ruenfecrirl.i ng matters to and order;
tThheem P arse swideelnl ta so ft hthe ep Rroecgeidounrael aCpopulinccaibl lseh balelf obree t hthee m - endangers the State's territorial integrity.
sehxaelclu btiev lea iodr gdaonw onf bthye l aRwe.g ion. In this capacity, he The other cases of suspension shall be laid down by
(s2h)a lTl hbee othrge ainnitzearltoiocnu,t ofur nocft itohne iSntga,t ec ormepproessietniotant iavned. law.
dHuet isehsa ollf bthe ea sCsoisutretds boyf Aa pRpeegailo annadl Bjuudriecaiual ,e lected at (2) The Regional Council may be dissolved by the
44 President of the Republic, after consultation with the
45
44

Article 57 pthueb sliacm aeu tthimorei taiess h. iImt sshealfl lf:r om among the members of
(1) The organs of the Region shall be the Regional -th eex Camouinnec ial.p Tpehael sR oeng iroengaiol nBaulr aenadu cshoaulnl crielf elelecct ttihoen
Council and the President of the Regional Council. dsoiscpioultoesg;i cal components of the Region.
The Regional Council and the President of the -( 4g)i vMe efminbael rrsu olifn Pgsa rolina mapepneta olsf athgea iRnestg fioinna sl hall sit in
Regional Council shall function within the jtuhde gReemgeionntsa lp Casosuendc bily i lno awne ra dcvoiusrotrsy i nc acpaasceist yo.f
framework of powers transferred to the Region by the administrative
State. dAirstpicultee s5;8
(2) The Regional Council shall be the deliberative -( 1e)x Aam dienlee,g aantey, oatphpeori ndtiespdu bteys t hexe pPrreesssildye dnet voof ltvhien g
organ of the Region. Regional Councillors whose uRpeopnu bitl ibcy s hlaawll .r epresent the State in the Region. In
term of office shall be 5 (five) years shall comprise : this capacity, he shall be responsible for national
- divisional delegates elected by indirect universal Ainrtteircelest s4,1 a dministrative control, ensuring compliance
suffrage; Twhiteh aluawdist banendc rhe gsuhalaltli boen sc,o ams pweetelln at st om caoinnttaroinl ianngd l aw
- representatives of traditional rulers elected by their raunlde oornd epru.b Hliec sahcaclol,u unntsd, ears t whee lalu atsh oornit tyh oofs et hoef public
peers. aGnodv seernmmi-epnutb, lsiucp eenrtveirsper iasneds .c o-ordinate civil State
The Regional Council shall reflect the various Iste rsvhiaclel:s in the Region.
sociological components of the Region. -( 2g)i vHee f sinhaall lr euxlienrgcsis oen t hfien saul pjuedrvgiesmoreyn atsu tphaosrsietyd olofw theer
The system of election, number, proportion by aSutadtiet coovuerrt tsh; e Region.
category, rules governing ineligibility, - examine any other matters expressly devolving
incompatibilities uAprtoincl iet 5b9y law.
and emoluments of Regional Councillors shall be laid (1) The Regional Council may be suspended by the
down by law. APrretiscildee n4t2 of the Republic where such organ:
(3) The Regional Council shall be headed by an (-1 c)a Trrhiees o orugta naciztiavtiiotine,s fcuonncttriaornyi ntog ,t hceo mcopnosstiittiuotnio ann; d
indigene of the Region elected from among its d- uutniedse romf itnhees S tuhpe rseemcue rCityo uorft tahned S thtaet eb eonr cphuebsl iict law
members for the life of the Council. caonmd oprrdiseers;, the conditions for referring matters to
The President of the Regional Council shall be the t-h eenmd aansg weresl lt haes Sthtea tper'so tceerdriutroer iaapl pinlitceagbrliety b. efore them
executive organ of the Region. In this capacity, he sThhael lo bthe elra icda sdeosw onf bsuys lpaewn.s ion shall be laid down by
shall be the interlocutor of the State representative. (la2w) T. he organization, functioning, composition and
He shall be assisted by a Regional Bureau elected at d(2u)t iTesh eo fR tehgei oCnoaul rCtso oufn Acipl pmeaayl abned d jiusdsoiclviaeld, by the
44 President of the Republic, after consultation with the
45
45

pCuobnlsitci tauutitohnoarilt iCeos.u Intc sihl ainll :a ll the cases provided for (3) The automatic replacement of the said organ by
-u nedxearm pinarea agprappeha l(s1 o)n a breogvieo.n al and council election the State in the cases provided for under paragraphs
dTihsep uottehse;r cases of dissolution shall be laid down by (1) and (2) above shall be decided by the President of
-la gwiv.e final rulings on appeals against final the Republic.
j(u3d) gTehme eanuttso pmaastsiecd r ebpyl alocwemere ncot uorft sth ien scaaisde os rogfa n by (4) The conditions of implementation of this article
athdem Sintaitsetr ianti tvhee cases provided for under paragraphs shall be determined by law.
d(1is)p auntde s(;2 ) above shall be decided by the President of
-th eex Ramepinueb,l iacn. y other disputes expressly devolving Article 61
u(4p)o Tn hiet bcyo nladwiti.o ns of implementation of this article (1) The following provinces shall become Regions:
shall be determined by law. - Adamaoua;
Article 41 - Centre;
TArhteic alue d6i0t bench shall be competent to control and - East;
r(1u)le T ohne pPurbesliicd eanctc oaunndt tsh, ea sB wureelal ua so of nth teh oRseeg oiof npaulb lic - Far North;
aCnodu nsecmil im-pauyb bliec seunstperepnrdiseeds b. y the President of the - Littoral;
IRt esphuablll:i c where such organs: - North.
-- cgaivrrey f oinuatl arcutliivnigtise so nc ofnintraalr jyu dtog ethmee Cntosn psatistsuetido nlo; wer - North-West;
a- uudnidt ecromuirntse; the security of the State or public law - West;
-a nedx aomrdinere; any other matters expressly devolving - South;
u- peonnd aint gbeyr ltahwe .S tate's territorial integrity. - South-West.
The other cases of suspension shall be laid down by (2) The President of the Republic may, as and when
Alarwti.cle 42 necessary:
((21)) TThhee Porrgesaindieznatt iaonnd, ftuhnec Btiuorneianug ,o cfo tmhep Roseigtiioonn aaln d a) change the names and modify the geographical
dCuotuiensc iolf m thaey Sbuep driesmmei sCseodu rbty a nthde t Phere bseidnecnhte os fi tt he boundaries of the Regions listed in paragraph (1)
cRoempupbrilsice,s ,a tfhteer ccoonndsiutlitoantiso fno rw riethfe trhrien Cg omnastttietursti oton al above;
tChoeumn caisl wine alll la tsh teh ec apsreosc perdouvried aepdp floicr aubnled ebre pfoarrea gtrhaepmh b) create other Regions. In this case, he shall give
s(1h)a lalb boev lea.i d down by law. them names and fix their geographical boundaries.
(T2h)e T ohteh eorr gcaasneizs aotifo dni,s mfuinscstailo snhinalgl, bceo mlaipdo sdiotiwonn abnyd
dlauwti.es of the Courts of Appeal and judicial, Article 62
46 47
46

Constitutional Council in all the cases provided for p(3u)b Tlihc ea uauthtoomritaietisc. rIet pslhaaclel:m ent of the said organ by
under paragraph (1) above. -th eex Samtaitne ei na pthpee aclass oesn prerogvioidneadl afnodr ucnoduenrc ipla erlaegcrtaiopnh s
The other cases of dissolution shall be laid down by d(1is)p auntde s(;2 ) above shall be decided by the President of
law. -th gei vRee fpiunballi rcu. lings on appeals against final
(3) The automatic replacement of the said organ by j(u4d) gTehme ecnotns dpiatisosnesd obfy i mlopwleerm ceonutarttsio inn ocaf stehsis o afr ticle
the State in the cases provided for under paragraphs ashdamlli nbies tdraettievrem ined by law.
(1) and (2) above shall be decided by the President of disputes;
the Republic. -A ertxiacmle i6n1e, any other disputes expressly devolving
(4) The conditions of implementation of this article u(1p)o Tn hite bfyo lllaoww.i ng provinces shall become Regions:
shall be determined by law. - Adamaoua;
A- Crteicnlter e4;1
Article 60 T- Ehea satu; dit bench shall be competent to control and
(1) The President and the Bureau of the Regional r-u Flea ro Nn opruthb;l ic accounts, as well as on those of public
Council may be suspended by the President of the a- nLdi tstoermali;- public enterprises.
Republic where such organs: I-t N shoartlhl:.
- carry out activities contrary to the Constitution; -- gNiovret hfi-nWale rsut;l ings on final judgements passed lower
- undermine the security of the State or public law a- uWdiets ct;o urts;
and order; -- eSxoaumthi;n e any other matters expressly devolving
- endanger the State's territorial integrity. u- pSoonu tiht -bWy elaswt. .
The other cases of suspension shall be laid down by (2) The President of the Republic may, as and when
law. Anerctiecslsea 4ry2:
(2) The President and the Bureau of the Regional (a1) )c Thahneg oer gthaen inzaamtioens ,a fnudn cmtioodniifnyg t,h ceo gmepoogsraitpiohnic aanl d
Council may be dismissed by the President of the dbuotuinesd aorfi eths eo fS tuhper eRmeeg iConosu rlti satendd itnh ep abreangcrhaepsh i t( 1)
Republic, after consultation with the Constitutional caobmovper;i ses, the conditions for referring matters to
Council in all the cases provided for under paragraph tbh)e cmre aaste w oetlhle ars R thege ipornosc. eIdnu trhei sa pcapsliec,a hbel es hbaelflo greiv teh em
(1) above. sthheamll bnea mlaeids adnodw fni xb yth leaiwr g. eographical boundaries.
The other cases of dismissal shall be laid down by (2) The organization, functioning, composition and
law. dAurttiicelse o 6f2 t he Courts of Appeal and judicial,
46 47
47

(1) The aforementioned rules and regulations shall
(3) The automatic replacement of the said organ by apply to all regions.
the State in the cases provided for under paragraphs (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Part,
(1) and (2) above shall be decided by the President of the law may take into consideration the specificities
the Republic. of certain Regions with regard to their organization
(4) The conditions of implementation of this article and functioning.
shall be determined by law.
PART XI
Article 61 Amendment of the Constitution
(1) The following provinces shall become Regions:
- Adamaoua; Article 63
- Centre; (1) Amendments to the Constitution may be proposed
- East; either by the President of the Republic or by
- Far North; Parliament.
- Littoral; (2) Any proposed amendment made by a member of
- North. Parliament shall be signed by at least one-third of
- North-West; the members of either House.
- West; (3) Parliament shall meet in congress when called
- South; upon to examine a draft or proposed amendment. The
- South-West. amendment shall be adopted by an absolute majority
(2) The President of the Republic may, as and when of the members of Parliament. The President of the
necessary: Republic may request a second reading; in which
a) change the names and modify the geographical case the amendment shall be adopted by a two-third
boundaries of the Regions listed in paragraph (1) Majority of the members of Parliament.
above; (4) The President of the Republic may decide to
b) create other Regions. In this case, he shall give submit any bill to amend the Constitution to -a
them names and fix their geographical boundaries. referendum; in which case the amendment shall be
adopted by a simple majority of the votes cast.
Apurtbilcilce a6u2t horities. It shall: Article 64
No procedure for the amendment of the Constitution
(-1 e)x Tamhei naef oarpepmeeanlst ioonn erde griuolneas la anndd r ceoguunlactiilo enlse cshtiaolnl No procedure for the amendment of the Constitutio4n8
affecting the republican form, unity and territorial
adpisppluyt etos ;a ll regions. 47 affecting the republican form, unity and territorial
integrity of the State and the democratic principles
(-2 g)i vWe iftihnoaul tr purlienjugds iocne atop ptheea lps raogvaisiniosnt sfi onfa lt his Part, integrity of the State and the democratic principles
which govern the Republic shall be accepted.
tjhued glaewm emnatsy p taasksee din btoy cloonwseidr ecroautirotsn itnh ec asspeesc oiffi cities which govern the Republic shall be accepted.
oadf mceirntiasitnra Rtievgei ons with regard to their organization
PART XII
adnisdp ufutensc;t ioning. PART XII
Special Provisions
- examine, any other disputes expressly devolving Special Provisions
PupAoRn Tit XbyI law.
Article 65
Amendment of the Constitution Article 65
The preamble shall be part and parcel of this
Article 41 The preamble shall be part and parcel of this
Constitution.
ATrhteic alue d6i3t bench shall be competent to control and Constitution.
(r1u)le A omn epnudbmliec natcsc toou tnhtes ,C aosn wsteiltlu atiso no nm tahyo sbee o pfr poupbolsiecd
Article 66
eaintdh esre bmyi -tphueb Plirce seindteenrpt roifs eths.e Republic or by Article 66
The President of the Republic, the Prime Minister,
PIta srhliaalml: ent. The President of the Republic, the Prime Minister,
Members of Government and persons ranking as
(-2 g)i vAen fyi nparlo rpuolsinegds a omne fnidnmale jnutd mgeamdee nbtys pa amsseemdb leorw oefr Members of Government and persons ranking as
such, the President and Members of the Bureau of the
Pauadrliita cmoeunrtts s;h all be signed by at least one-third of such, the President and Members of the Bureau of the
National Assembly, the President and Members of
t-h eex mameminbee arns yo fo tehitehre mr aHttoeursse e. xpressly devolving National Assembly, the President and Members of
the bureau of the Senate, Members of Parliament,
(u3p)o Pna irtl ibaym leanwt .s hall meet in congress when called the bureau of the Senate, Members of Parliament,
Senators, all holders of an elective office, Secretaries-
upon to examine a draft or proposed amendment. The Senators, all holders of an elective office, Secretaries-
General of Ministries and persons ranking as such,
aAmrteicnldem 4e2n t shall be adopted by an absolute majority General of Ministries and persons ranking as such,
Directors of the Central Administration, General
o(1f )t hTeh em oermgbanerizs aotfio Pna, rfluianmcteinotn.i Tngh,e c Pormespiodseintito onf athned Directors of the Central Administration, General
Managers of public and semi-public enterprises,
Rduetpieusb loifc tmhea yS urepqreumeset aC soeucrot nadn dr etahdei bnegn; cinh ews hiti ch Managers of public and semi-public enterprises,
Judicial and Legal Officers, administrative personnel
ccaosmep trhies easm, tehned cmoenndti tsihoanlsl fboer ardeofeprtreidn gb ym aa tttweros- ttoh ird Judicial and Legal Officers, administrative personnel
in charge of the tax base, collection and handling of
Mtheamjo raisty w oefl lt haes mtheem pbroecrse douf rPea arplipalmiceanbtl.e before them in charge of the tax base, collection and handling of
public funds, all managers of public votes and
(s4h)a lTl hbee Plarieds iddoewntn o bf yt hlea wR.e public may decide to public funds, all managers of public votes and
property, shall declare their assets and property at the
s(2u)b mThite a onryg abnililz taoti oamn,e fnudn cthtieo nCionngs, tcitoumtiopons tioti o-an and property, shall declare their assets and property at the
beginning and at the end of their tenure of office.
rdeufteireesn odfu tmhe; iCno wurhtisc ho fc Aaspep tehael aamnde njuddmiceinatl ,s hall be beginning and at the end of their tenure of office.
The other categories of persons to whom the
adopted by a simple majority of the votes cast. The other categories of persons to whom the
provisions of this article shall apply and the
Article 64 provisions of this article shall apply and the
48 48 4 4 9 9

(1) The aforementioned rules and regulations shall
(3) The automatic replacement of the said organ by apply to all regions.
the State in the cases provided for under paragraphs (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Part,
(1) and (2) above shall be decided by the President of the law may take into consideration the specificities
the Republic. of certain Regions with regard to their organization
(4) The conditions of implementation of this article and functioning.
shall be determined by law.
PART XI
Article 61 Amendment of the Constitution
(1) The following provinces shall become Regions:
- Adamaoua; Article 63
- Centre; (1) Amendments to the Constitution may be proposed
- East; either by the President of the Republic or by
- Far North; Parliament.
- Littoral; (2) Any proposed amendment made by a member of
- North. Parliament shall be signed by at least one-third of
- North-West; the members of either House.
- West; (3) Parliament shall meet in congress when called
- South; upon to examine a draft or proposed amendment. The
- South-West. amendment shall be adopted by an absolute majority
(2) The President of the Republic may, as and when of the members of Parliament. The President of the
necessary: Republic may request a second reading; in which
a) change the names and modify the geographical case the amendment shall be adopted by a two-third
boundaries of the Regions listed in paragraph (1) Majority of the members of Parliament.
above; (4) The President of the Republic may decide to
b) create other Regions. In this case, he shall give submit any bill to amend the Constitution to -a
them names and fix their geographical boundaries. referendum; in which case the amendment shall be
adopted by a simple majority of the votes cast.
Article 62 Apurtbilcilce a6u4t horities. It shall:
No procedure for the amendment of the Constitution
(1) The aforementioned rules and regulations shall N- eox pamroicneed uaprep efoalrs t hoen aremgeinondaml eanntd o cf othuen cCilo enlsetcittuiotino 4n8
affecting the republican form, unity and territorial
apply to all regions. 47 adfifsepcuttiensg; the republican form, unity and territorial
integrity of the State and the democratic principles
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Part, i-n gteivger iftyin oalf rtuhlei nSgtsa toen a napdp tehael sd eamgaoicnrsat tfiicn parl inciples
which govern the Republic shall be accepted.
the law may take into consideration the specificities wjuhdigcehm geonvtes rpna tshsee dR beyp ulobwlice rs hcaolul rbtse ianc ccaespetes do.f
of certain Regions with regard to their organization administrative
PART XII
and functioning. PdiAspRuTte sX; II
Special Provisions
S- peexcaimali nPer,o avnisyi oonthse r disputes expressly devolving
PART XI upon it by law.
Article 65
Amendment of the Constitution Article 65
The preamble shall be part and parcel of this
TArhteic plere 4a1m ble shall be part and parcel of this
Constitution.
Article 63 CThoen satuitduitti obne.n ch shall be competent to control and
(1) Amendments to the Constitution may be proposed rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public
Article 66
either by the President of the Republic or by Aanrdti csleem 6i6-p ublic enterprises.
The President of the Republic, the Prime Minister,
Parliament. TIt hseh aPlrle: sident of the Republic, the Prime Minister,
Members of Government and persons ranking as
(2) Any proposed amendment made by a member of M- geimveb feirnsa ol fr uGlionvgesr nomn efinnta al njudd pgeermsoennst sr apnaksisnegd alos wer
such, the President and Members of the Bureau of the
Parliament shall be signed by at least one-third of sauucdhit, cthoeu rPtsre; sident and Members of the Bureau of the
National Assembly, the President and Members of
the members of either House. N- eaxtiaomnainl eA asnsyem obthlyer, tmhea tPterress iedxepnrte assnldy Mdeevmolbveirnsg o f
the bureau of the Senate, Members of Parliament,
(3) Parliament shall meet in congress when called tuhpeo bnu irte bayu loafw t.h e Senate, Members of Parliament,
Senators, all holders of an elective office, Secretaries-
upon to examine a draft or proposed amendment. The Senators, all holders of an elective office, Secretaries-
General of Ministries and persons ranking as such,
amendment shall be adopted by an absolute majority GAretnicelrea l4 o2f Ministries and persons ranking as such,
Directors of the Central Administration, General
of the members of Parliament. The President of the D(1i)r eTchtoe ros rogfa nthizea Ctieonnt,r faul nAcdtimonininisgt,r actoiomnp, oGsietnioenra al nd
Managers of public and semi-public enterprises,
Republic may request a second reading; in which Mduatineasg oefr st hoef Spuupbrliecm aen dC oseumrt ia-pnudb tlhiec benentecrhpersis iets ,
Judicial and Legal Officers, administrative personnel
case the amendment shall be adopted by a two-third Jcuodmicpiraisl easn, dt hLee cgoanl dOitfifoicnesr fso, ra dremfeinrriisntrga tmivaet tpeersr stoon nel
in charge of the tax base, collection and handling of
Majority of the members of Parliament. itnh ecmha arsg ew oefll t ahse tthaex pbraoscee, dcuorlele acptipolnic aanbdle h baenfdolrien gth oefm
public funds, all managers of public votes and
(4) The President of the Republic may decide to pshuabllli cb efu lnaidds ,d aolwl mn abnya lgaewrs. of public votes and
property, shall declare their assets and property at the
submit any bill to amend the Constitution to -a p(2ro) pTehrety o, rsghaanlli zdaeticolanr,e f uthnecitri oanssinegts, acnodm pproospiteirotny aant dth e
beginning and at the end of their tenure of office.
referendum; in which case the amendment shall be bdeugtiiensn oinf gth aen Cd oaut rtthse o efn Ad popfe tahle airn tde njuudriec oiafl ,o ffice.
The other categories of persons to whom the
adopted by a simple majority of the votes cast. The other categories of persons to whom the
provisions of this article shall apply and the
Article 64 provisions of this article shall apply and the
48 49 4 4 9 9

pcounbdliicti aountsh oofr iitmieps.l eImt sehnatlalt:i on thereof shall be ((66)) WWhheerree tthhee SSeennaattee iiss ppuutt iinn ppllaaccee bbeeffoorree tthhee
-d eetxearmmiinnee da pbpye laalws .o n regional and council election rreeggiioonnss,, tthhee eelleeccttoorraall ccoolllleeggee ffoorr tthhee eelleeccttiioonn ooff
disputes; SSeennaattoorrss sshhaallll ccoommpprriissee eexxcclluussiivveellyy MMuunniicciippaall
-P gAiRveT f iXnaIIl Ir ulings on appeals against final CCoouunncciilllloorrss..
jTurdagnesmitieonntas lp aanssde Fd ibnya ll oPwroevr icsioounrsts in cases of SSeeccttiioonn 22:: TThhiiss llaaww sshhaallll bbee rreeggiisstteerreedd,, ppuubblliisshheedd
administrative aaccccoorrddiinngg ttoo tthhee pprroocceedduurree ooff uurrggeennccyy aanndd iinnsseerrtteedd iinn
dAirstpicultee s6;7 tthhee ooffffiicciiaall ggaazzeettttee iinn EEnngglliisshh aanndd FFrreenncchh..
-( 1e)x Tamhei nnee,w a niyn sotitthuetrio dniss pouft ethse e Rxperpeusbsllyic dpervoovlivdiendg for
uunpdoenr i tth biys Claown.s titution shall be set up AArrttiiccllee 6688
progressively. TThhee lleeggiissllaattiioonn aapppplliiccaabbllee iinn tthhee FFeeddeerraall SSttaattee ooff
A(2r)t iWcleh i4le1 the institutions are being set up and until CCaammeerroooonn aanndd iinn tthhee FFeeddeerraatteedd SSttaatteess oonn tthhee ddaattee ooff
Tsuhceh a tuimdiet btheantc thh esyh aalrl eb see ct oump,p tehtee netx tios tcinogn trol and eennttrryy iinnttoo ffoorrccee ooff tthhiiss CCoonnssttiittuuttiioonn sshhaallll rreemmaaiinn iinn
rinusleti tounti opnusb loicf tahcec oRuenptus,b alisc wshealll la rse omna tihno isne p olaf cpeu abnlidc ffoorrccee iinnssooffaarr aass iitt iiss nnoott rreeppuuggnnaanntt ttoo tthhiiss
ashnadl ls ecmoni-tipnuubel itco efnutnecrtpiroinse: s. CCoonnssttiittuuttiioonn,, aanndd aass lloonngg aass iitt iiss nnoott aammeennddeedd bbyy
Iat) sThhaell :i ncumbent President of the Republic shall ssuubbsseeqquueenntt llaawwss aanndd rreegguullaattiioonnss..
-re gmivaein f iinna ol frfuilcien gusn toinl tfhien aeln jdu dogf ehmise cnutsr rpeansts teedrm lo, wer
asuubdjiet ccto tuor ttsh;e implementation of the provisions of AArrttiiccllee 6699
-A erxtiacmlei n6e ( 4a)n yo fo tthhiesr Cmoantstetirtsu teixopnr;e ssly devolving TThhiiss llaaww sshhaallll bbee rreeggiisstteerreedd aanndd ppuubblliisshheedd iinn tthhee
ub)p oTnh eit Mbye mlabwe.r s of Parliament of the National OOffffiicciiaall GGaazzeettttee ooff tthhee RReeppuubblliicc ooff CCaammeerroooonn iinn
Assembly shall remain in office until the end of their EEnngglliisshh aanndd FFrreenncchh aanndd iimmpplleemmeenntteedd aass tthhee
Acurrtircelnet 4te2r m, subject to the implementation of the CCoonnssttiittuuttiioonn ooff tthhee RReeppuubblliicc ooff CCaammeerroooonn..
(p1r)o vTihsieo onrsg oafn Aizrattiicolne, 8f u(n1c2t)i oanbionvge,. composition and
d(3u)t iTesh eo fN tahtei oSnuapl rAemssee mCboluyr ts ahnadll tehxee brceinsceh feusl li t YYaaoouunnddee,, tthhee 1144tthh AApprriill 22000088
cleogmisplaritsivese, pthoew ceor nadnidti eonnjso fyo ra lrle Pfearrrliinamg menattatreyr s to TThhee PPrreessiiddeenntt ooff tthhee RReeppuubblliicc,,
tphreemro gaast wiveelsl uans ttihl eth per oSceendautere i sa pseptl iucpa.b le before them ((SSiiggnneedd)) PPAAUULL BBIIYYAA
s(4h)a lTl hbee Slauipdr demowe nC boyu rlta wsh.a ll perform the duties of the
(C2o)n Tshtietu otirognaanli zCaotiuonnc, iflu unncttiilo tnhien gla,t cteorm isp osesti tuiopn. and
d(5u)t iTesh eo ft etrhreit oCroiaulr tosr goaf nAizpapteioanl aonfd t hjued Sictaiatel, shall
remain unchanged until the Regions are set up. 5511
50
50

conditions of implementation thereof shallbe ((p66u))b WWlichh aeeurreeth ttohhreei tSSieeesnn. aaItttee s iihssa pplluu: tt iinn ppllaaccee bbeeffoorree tthhee
determined by law. rr-ee eggxiioaomnnssi,,n ttehh eae peeplleeeccattloos rroaanll ccrooelglllieeoggneea flf ooarrn ttdhh eec oeeulleencccttiiiloo ennl eoocfft ion
SSdeiesnnpaauttotoerrsss; sshhaallll ccoommpprriissee eexxcclluussiivveellyy MMuunniicciippaall
PART XIII CC- gooiuuvnnecc ifillilnlooarrlss .r.ulings on appeals against final
Transitional and Final Provisions SSjueedccgttiieoomnn e 22n::t sTT hphiaisss sllaeawdw bssyhh aallolllw bbeeer r rceeogguiissrttteesr rieendd ,c, appsuuebbsll iiossfhh eedd
aaaccdccmooirrnddiiisnntgrga tttooiv ttehh ee pprroocceedduurree ooff uurrggeennccyy aanndd iinnsseerrtteedd iinn
Article 67 ttdhhiees p ooufftffeiicsc;ii aall ggaazzeettttee iinn EEnngglliisshh aanndd FFrreenncchh..
(1) The new institutions of the Republic provided for -examine, any other disputes expressly devolving
under this Constitution shall be set up AAuprrttoiicncll eiet 66b88y law.
progressively. TThhee lleeggiissllaattiioonn aapppplliiccaabblleeiinntthhee FFeeddeerraallSSttaattee ooff
(2) While the institutions are being set up and until CCAaratmmiceelreroo 4oo1nn aanndd iinntthhee FFeeddeerraatteedd SSttaatteess oonn tthhee ddaattee ooff
such time that they areset up, the existing eeTnnhtterryy a iuinndttioot fbfooerrnccceeh oo sffh ttahhliilss bCCe oocnnossmttiipttuuetttiieoonnnt sstohh aaclloll nrreetrmmoala iiannnidinn
institutions of the Republic shall remain in place and ffroourrlcece eo ininn spsoouffbaalrri caa ssa ciitct oiissu nnnotostt, rraeespp uwuggennllaa nanstt ttooon t ththhiisos se of public
shallcontinue tofunction: CCanoodnn ssstteiimttuuitt-iioponun,b, alainncdd e anasste llroopnnrgigs eaasss. iitt iiss nnoott aammeennddeedd bbyy
a)The incumbent President of the Republic shall ssIutu bsbhsseaeqlqluu: eenntt llaawwss aanndd rreegguullaattiioonnss..
remain in office until the end of his current term, -give final rulings on final judgements passed lower
subject tothe implementation of the provisions of AAaurrtdtiiicctll ece o 66u99r ts;
Article 6 (4) of thisConstitution; TT- hehxiissa lmlaawiwn ess hhaaanllyll bboeeth rreeergg miisstateetrtreeerdds aaennxddp rppeuusbbsllliyiss hhdeeeddv oiinnlvttihhneeg
b) The Members of Parliament of the National OOupffffoiicncii aiatll bGGyaa lzzaeewtttt.ee ooff tthhee RReeppuubblliicc ooff CCaammeerroooonn iinn
Assemblyshall remaininoffice until the end of their EEnngglliisshh aanndd FFrreenncchh aanndd iimmpplleemmeenntteedd aass tthhee
current term, subject tothe implementation of the CCAorotnnicssltteiitt uu4tt2iioo nn ooff tthhee RReeppuubblliicc ooff CCaammeerroooonn..
provisions of Article 8 (12) above. (1)The organization, functioning, composition and
(3) The National Assembly shall exercise full YYduaatooieuusnn dodefe ,,t htthheee S 11u44pttrhhe mAApep rrCiillo 22u00r00t 88a n d the benches it
legislative powerand enjoy all Parliamentary TTcohhmee pPPrrrieessseiisdd,ee tnnhtte oo cffo ttnhhdeei tRRioeenppsuu bbfolliircc r,,eferring matters to
prerogativesuntil the Senate isset up. ((tShSeiiggmnn eeadds) )w PPeAAllUU aLLs tBBheIIYY pAArocedure applicable before them
(4) The SupremeCourt shallperform the dutiesof the shall be laid down by law.
Constitutional Council until the latter is set up. (2)The organization, functioning, composition and
(5) The territorial organization of the State shall duties of the Courts of Appeal and judicial,
remainunchangeduntil the Regions are set up. 5511
50
51



=== 25.12.54-Code-de-procedure-civile-du-16-decembre-1954--2022_09_27-06_08_23-UTC-en.pdf ===


Official Journal o f the Republic of Cameroon
CODE O F C IVIL PROCEDURE
December 16, 1 954
Article 1 — T his decree, which w ill b e e xecuted under t he t itle "Code of C ivil and C ommercial Procedure
", codifies t he provisions of the d ecrees relating to c ivil a nd commercial p rocedure b efore
the F rench C ourts of Cameroon a nd regulates, in e xecution o f a rticle 5 6 of t he d ecree o f 2 7
November 1947, m atters not p rovided for in s aid decrees.
BOOK ONE
Courts.
TITLE I
On the i ntroduction and instruction o f p roceedings.
SECTION I
Of t he a ction and representation o f the parties.
Article 2 — I n c ivil a nd commercial m atters, t he p arties m ay, before a ll courts, act a nd
defend themselves, v erbally or t hrough t he ministry o f d efense lawyers. When the
number of d efense l awyers a t t he s eat o f the court o r the J ustice o f t he P eace w ith e xtended jurisdiction
will be less than two for any c ause o r w hen the number of d efense lawyers o f t he
If the s eat is i nsufficient, the p arties may b e r epresented b efore t his c ourt by a
agent o f t heir c hoice, provided with written a nd e xpress power o f a ttorney a nd approved b y the j udge. The p arties may
also resort to the procedure on r equests and b riefs provided for i n A rticles 19 et s eq.
[Note. The JPCE have b een abolished and r eplaced b y courts since O . 5 9.86 o f 1 7 Nov. 5 9]
SECTION I I
Of c onciliation.
Article 3 — A ll p roceedings are e xempt from t he preliminary c onciliation procedure.
However, i n a ll c ases, t he p arties may, b y a greement, v oluntarily a ppear at t he
for t he p urposes o f conciliation before the c ompetent Judge. The a pplicant also h as the o ption o f s ummoning t he
defendant t o conciliation, observing the time limits s et o ut i n A rticles 1 4 and 15.
The J udge s eized may, a t a ny s tage of the procedure, a ttempt t o c onciliate the p arties w ho may b e assisted b y their
lawyers.
Article 4 — I f t here is c onciliation, t he Judge, assisted b y the C lerk, d raws up a report of t he c onditions of t he a rrangement.
This r eport i s s igned b y b oth parties i f t hey know and can do so, o therwise i t is n oted. I t is p roof until proven false with
respect to all p arties and of its d ate a nd the statements r eported therein; the a greements o f t he p arties recorded i n t he
report are e nforceable and c arry a l egal m ortgage. This r eport is f iled w ith t he r egistry.
SECTION I II
Postponements.


Article 5 — Subject to what w ill be s aid in A rticles 1 8 e t s eq., proceedings i n c ivil a nd commercial matters a re
brought by s ummons.
Article 6 — The summons shall c ontain:
1° The date of the days, months a nd years, t he name, p rofession a nd address o f the applicant;
2° The name, a ddress and registration number o f the bailiff o r e nforcement o fficer, t he name a nd
address o f t he defendant, and mention of the person t o whom a copy o f the writ will be left;
3° The subject o f the request, the summary s tatement of the grounds;
4° The indication o f the court which must hear t he request, t he date a nd time o f the hearing.
Article 7 — All summonses s hall be m ade to t he person o r d omicile, but if the bailiff o r e nforcement o fficer
finds at the d omicile neither the party nor any o f his r elatives o r s ervants, o r i f these
refuse t o receive the copy, h e will i mmediately hand t he copy over t o the mayor o r d eputy mayor o f the
municipality or to the a cting official, t o the h ead of the local a dministrative u nit (head o f subdivision, p ost,
etc.) or, f ailing t hat, t o the heads o f the group or v illage. T he person w ho has r eceived the
copy w ill be issued against t he original f ree of c harge.
However, bailiffs or enforcement agents a re o nly r equired to travel w hen the person
assigned will b e d omiciled within a radius of 2 0 k ilometers f rom t heir r esidence. T hey can a lso
be dispensed with b y o rder o f the President when the person t o be s ummoned resides i n a locality
located more t han 7 k ilometers from a ny p assable r oad.
In t hese cases, the bailiff or enforcement o fficer sends t he documents necessary f or t he summons by registered
mail t o the administrative authority c losest to the domicile o f the party t o
summon. This authority shall h ave t he summons served a s s oon as p ossible a gainst receipt. T he
dated receipt i s s igned by the person c oncerned if t hey can a nd know it, o therwise m ention is made.
It constitutes proof o f delivery of the summons a nd is r eturned to t he b ailiff o r enforcement o fficer by registered m ail.
In t he case of a s ummons made in a ccordance w ith the preceding p rovisions, the time l imit o f Article 14 i s
increased by f ifteen days.
When the c opy is g iven t o any p erson o ther t han the party i tself or t he Attorney G eneral
Republic, i t will b e delivered in a sealed e nvelope, bearing n o other i ndication, on o ne side, t han the
name and address of the party and, on t he o ther, t he stamp of the bailiff's o r a gent's o ffice
execution, affixed to the closure of the envelope.
The bailiff o r enforcement o fficer will m ake a note of everything, b oth on t he original a nd on the copy.
Article 8 — (D. 2 1 N ovember 1 933). - In p ersonal matters, t he defendant w ill be summoned before t he court o f
his d omicile; if he has no d omicile, before the court o f his r esidence.
In matters o f alimony, the p roceedings may be b rought b efore the c ourt of the d omicile o f the r equesting a scendant.
Disputes r elating to s upplies, works, rentals, l eases o f works o r i ndustry m ay b e brought before t he judge o f
the place w here the agreement w as e ntered i nto or e xecuted, when one o f the parties i s domiciled i n t hat place.
If there a re several defendants, before the court o f the domicile o f one of them, a t t he plaintiff's c hoice.
In real m atters, before the court of the location o f t he disputed o bject.


In m ixed matters, before the j udge o f t he s ituation, or before t he judge of t he defendant's d omicile.
In matters of a company, as long as it e xists, before the judge of t he p lace w here i t i s e stablished.
In m atters o f succession:
1° O n r equests between h eirs, u p to a nd including the division;
2° O n t he c laims which would b e brought b y creditors of t he deceased, before t he division;
3° O n a pplications r elating t o t he e xecution o f d ispositions upon death, until t he final j udgment, b efore
the c ourt o f the p lace w here t he s uccession i s opened.
In b ankruptcy matters, b efore the J udge of t he bankrupt's d omicile.
In t erms of guarantee, before the J udge where the original a pplication w ill b e p ending.
Finally, in t he e vent of e lection of d omicile for t he execution of a n a ct, before t he court of t he elected domicile,
or b efore the c ourt o f the a ctual domicile of t he defendant, in a ccordance with article 1 11 o f the civil c ode.
The claim f or compensation f or d amage caused by a n offense, a contravention, or a quasi-offense m ay be
brought before t he c ourt o f t he p lace where the damaging act o ccurred.
Article 9 — In c ommercial matters, t he a pplicant m ay assign a t h is c hoice:
- B efore the c ourt of t he d efendant's d omicile;
- B efore the p erson i n w hose jurisdiction the promise w as m ade a nd the goods delivered;
- B efore the p erson i n w hose jurisdiction the payment w as t o be m ade.
Article 1 0 — In m aritime c ases where t here a re non-domiciled parties, and in t hose where t here is a question of
tackle, provisions, c rews and r epairs of vessels r eady t o w eigh a nchor, a nd other urgent and provisional
matters, summons f rom day to d ay, or from hour to h our may be g iven b y order a nd the default may be j udged
immediately.
Article 1 1 — All a ssignments given on board to t he person a ssigned s hall be valid.
Article 1 2 — Requests f or costs made by d efense lawyers, b ailiffs, enforcement a gents or ministerial officers
shall be brought to the C ourt where t he c osts w ere incurred.
Article 1 3 — Will b e a ssigned
1° T he S tate and t he T erritory i n t he p erson or office o f the High Commissioner.
2° Administrations or public establishments, in t heir o ffices, in t he place where t he headquarters o f t he
administration resides; i n other p laces, in t he person a nd at t he office o f their r epresentative.
3° The municipalities, in the p erson o r at the home of t he mayor or the official acting in o ffice.
In t he above cases, the o riginal will be endorsed b y t he person t o w hom a copy o f t he writ is left; i n t he event
absence o r refusal, t he v isa w ill be given, e ither by t he Justice o f the Peace w ith extended jurisdiction, o r by the
public prosecutor a t t he C ourt of F irst I nstance to w hom, in t his case, t he copy w ill b e
left.


4° Trading c ompanies, as l ong as t hey exist i n t heir corporate h eadquarters, and, if there i s none, in t he
person o r at the domicile of o ne of t he partners.
5° Unions a nd management o f c reditors, i n t he person or a t the d omicile of o ne o f t he t rustees or d irectors.
6° T hose who have no k nown domicile i n Cameroon, at t he p lace of t heir current residence: i f the p lace
is not k nown, the writ w ill b e p osted a t the m ain door of the c ourtroom where the r equest is made, a
second copy will be given t o the p ublic prosecutor, who w ill e ndorse t he o riginal.
7° T hose who live i n French territory, that i s t o say F rance, A lgeria, the o verseas departments and o ther
overseas t erritories a nd t hose who are e stablished in T ogo, i n t he c ountries u nder
protectorate of France, i ncluding Tunisia, t o the p ublic p rosecutor's o ffice at t he
court where the application i s m ade, which w ill endorse t he o riginal and s end t he c opy d irectly t o the h ead of the
judicial service which w ill t ransmit it d irectly: in F rance, i n t he o verseas departments, in
Algeria a nd T unisia, t o t he office of t he Public P rosecutor o f the d istrict where the
person f or w hom i t i s i ntended; i n overseas territories, T ogo a nd protectorate countries
other than Tunisia, t o the h ead of the j udicial service.
In t he J ustices o f the Peace w ith e xtended or o rdinary j urisdiction, it is t he J udge w ho will endorse t he
original and t ransmit the copy.
8° Those who l ive a broad, t o the s ame p ublic p rosecutor's o ffice which, u nder the s ame conditions, will
send the copy to the Minister o f Foreign Affairs o r to a ny o ther authority d etermined by d iplomatic
conventions.
Article 14 — T he o rdinary period o f summons will be e ight days f or t hose who a re d omiciled i n t he p lace
where the c ompetent c ourt o r j ustice o f t he p eace s its; thirty days f or t hose who a re d omiciled
in o ther parts of Cameroon. Outside the territory, Article 1 5 will be a pplied. In c ases requiring s peed, the
President may, b y o rder issued o n r equest, a llow t he s ummons to
short notice.
Article 1 5 — If the p erson being s ummoned remains o utside t he territory, t he time l imit w ill be:
1° T wo m onths for those who l ive in m etropolitan F rance, in E urope, i n A frica,
Madagascar and Reunion;
2° T hree months for those who live in A merica;
3° F our months for those w ho live in a ll other countries.
The a bove d eadlines will b e d oubled in the event o f war.
Article 16 — W hen a s ummons t o a p arty domiciled o utside Cameroon i s g iven t o him personally i n
Cameroon, it w ill only carry the o rdinary time limits, e xcept for t he c ourt to e xtend t hem, if necessary.
Article 17 — I f, by a pplication o f the p rovisions of Article 6 03, a w rit is d eclared n ull and v oid by t he f act
of t he b ailiff or t he enforcement agent, they m ay b e o rdered t o p ay t he c osts o f the w rit and t he
procedure cancelled, without p rejudice to d amages of the p arty, d epending on the c ircumstances.
SECTION I V
Of v oluntary appearance.
Article 18 — T he p arties m ay appear v oluntarily, without summons, b efore t he j udge to b e j udged; in
this c ase, t his w ill be m entioned in the j udgment.


They may also appear before a court other than that o f t heir domicile or residence.
; m ention o f t heir v oluntary appearance w ill b e included i n the judgment.
SECTION V
On the p rocedure for r equests and b riefs.
Article 1 9 — In a ny matter, the parties may r efer the m atter t o t he competent court by a pplication and
plead o n b riefs, even b y defense l awyer, when t hey r eside m ore t han 20 kilometers from t he
place where t he court seized sits.
Article 2 0 — The a pplication i nitiating p roceedings which m ust contain a ll the i nformation appearing i n
Article 6 ( 1°, 3° and 4 °) a nd a full s tatement o f t he c ase and the g rounds is s ent w ith as much
copies o f t he defendants' documents by the plaintiff t o t he P resident of t he c ompetent court by l etter
recommended. The r equest must also contain t he statement t hat t he applicant i ntends t o p lead
following t he procedure of A rticles 1 9 and f ollowing. Within t wenty-four h ours of i ts receipt the
The m agistrate i ssues a n order s etting the date o f t he h earing and submits t he f ile t o t he clerk w ho, within
twenty-four hours, send by r egistered letter w ith acknowledgment o f r eceipt:
(a) T o t he defendant, a copy of t he order a nd the application instituting p roceedings;
(b) T o t he applicant, c opy of t he order.
When the registered letter has n ot reached t he d efendant, t he c lerk s ends a c opy o f t he o rder
with m ention o f i ts non-delivery and t he a pplication initiating proceedings t o t he b ailiff or enforcement agent
to b e c arried out i n accordance with the p rovisions o f A rticles 6 et s eq. I t i nforms the applicant of t his transmission a t
the s ame time.
The order is t hen deemed u nwritten.
Article 21 — W hen the p arties wish t o plead on brief, t hey m ay d o s o in the f ollowing manner:
The application initiating p roceedings or the summons s hall serve a s a s tatement o f c laim; the
defendant or his or her defense a ttorney s hall send to t he r egistry, before t he d ate o f t he hearing set
by the s ummons o r order, a statement o f c laim accompanied by a s many copies as there a re claimants.
The clerk notifies t his m emorandum b y registered l etter w ith acknowledgment o f r eceipt to
applicant o r to the defense lawyer w ho will b e appointed by him, w arning h im that h e w ill have a p eriod o f o ne
months, excluding j udicial vacations i f a pplicable, to p roduce a r eply brief
accompanied by as many copies a s there are d efenders.
Within eight days o f receiving this m emorandum, in reply, the clerk s hall notify i t in the same m anner
to the d efender, who shall a lso h ave t he t ime l imit p rovided f or i n the p receding paragraph to r espond.
When the registered letter has n ot been able t o r each the a ddressee, o r when the c lerk k nows t hat
transmission b y post is n ot possible, the applicant i s informed by the clerk; he t hen p roceeds v ia
bailiff a s stated in t he p revious article.
The case t hat w as called for h earing o n its date i s then adjourned. I t will b e p laced back on t he h earing
list b y t he most d iligent p arty.
Article 2 2 — All i nvestigative m easures will be brought to t he a ttention o f t he parties by t he c lerk a nd
carried out by him o n t heir b ehalf.
SECTION V I


On t he procedure in m obile court hearings.
Article 23 — W hen civil or commercial matters are involved which may b e tried b y a j udge
sitting i n a mobile court, due to t he presence o f the parties a t t he place where this h earing i s h eld
or n ear this place, t he j udge proceeds a s prescribed in a rticles 30 and f ollowing of t he decree o f N ovember 2 7, 1947.
SECTION V II
From deposit to r egistry.
Article 24 — E xcept in c ases o f l egal a id, the a pplicant is r equired, before any p roceedings, t o d eposit w ith t he registry o f
the court he i ntends t o b ring an action a gainst a s um sufficient to g uarantee p ayment
costs, including r egistration. H e will h ave t o s upplement this p rovision i f d uring the proceedings i t i s
proves i nsufficient.
If t his insufficiency is d ue to the f iling o f c ounterclaims b y the defendant, t he additional p rovision will be provided by t he
latter.
In t he absence o f a provision, the a mount of w hich will, i n t he event of d ifficulty, be f ixed b y order of the president o f the
court upon simple request f rom t he c lerk, no further action will be taken i n the proceedings.
TITLE OF
21ST - H earings.
Article 25 — A t t he h earing f ixed b y the s ummons or by order or agreed b etween the parties, they w ill appear e ither in
person, o r b y their d efense lawyer, o r b y their a gent, u nder the conditions s et out in A rticle 2 .
Article 26 — ( Art. 2 of t he D . of N ovember 27, 1 947).- C ourt hearings are public,
unless such p ublicity is d angerous to o rder or morality, in w hich case t he court shall d eclare it s o by prior j udgment.
In all cases, judgments i n a ll matters are p ronounced p ublicly.
Article 2 7 — T he p arties s hall b e required to express themselves w ith moderation and to m aintain r espect in all m atters
due to Justice. Those w ho attend t he h earings m ust k eep t heir h eads uncovered in r espect and
silence. Everything t hat t he president o r the j ustice o f t he peace orders f or the maintenance o f o rder in c ourt will be
executed punctually a nd immediately. The same p rovision will be observed i n p laces w here magistrates and c lerks
exercise their functions.
Article 28 — I f one or m ore individuals, w hoever they may b e, break the silence, give
signs o f a pproval o r d isapproval, either in defense o f the parties, or in t he speeches a nd o rders of t he magistrates, cause
or e xcite t umult i n a ny way whatsoever, a nd if after t he warning
of the Presiding J udge t hey do not r eturn t o o rder immediately, they will be ordered t o withdraw and t he
resistance f ighters w ill be seized a nd immediately t aken to t he remand center for 2 4 hours; t hey will be received
on the order of t he P residing Judge, which w ill be mentioned i n t he minutes of t he hearing; t his d ecision will not be subject
to appeal under any c ircumstances.
Article 29 — I f an offence i s c ommitted w ithin t he p remises a nd d uring the hearing, t he President
or t he Justice o f t he P eace w ith extended jurisdiction w ill draw u p a r eport of the fact, hear t he accused and t he
witnesses and will a pply without delay the p enalties imposed by the penal code, w ithout p rejudice to t he
right of a ppeal. T he offender may be placed under a rrest, even i f h e h as l eft
the courthouse. If he cannot be arrested or i f he d oes n ot appear b efore t he court, the judgment
will b e r eturned b y d efault.


If i t i s a J ustice of t he P eace w ith o rdinary jurisdiction, he may arrest t he offender; he will draw u p a r eport of the fact,
hear the a ccused a nd the witnesses and send, w ithout delay, t he information f ile t o the Public Prosecutor or the Justice
of the P eace w ith e xtended jurisdiction of the district.
If t he a ct c ommitted in c ourt c onstitutes only a simple c ontravention, t he Judge w ill apply t he simple p olice penalties.
Article 3 0 — I f it is a crime c ommitted in c ourt, t he president o f the court, a fter h aving made
arrest the o ffender, proceed w ith t he i nvestigation; h e then f orwards t he f ile to the P ublic Prosecutor.
Article 3 1 — A t t he h earing, t he parties ( or their representatives) are a uthorized to present oral o bservations or to develop
their c onclusions.
The conclusions filed with t he registry a nd communicated t o the opposing party l ess than three days b efore
the h earing where the case i s to b e a rgued may b e rejected from the debates as l ate, as w ell a s t he
documents which w ill b e a ttached.
Article 3 2 — T he Judge m ay order t he documents t o be filed w ith t he court for immediate or subsequent r uling.
If the p arties a ppear and the final judgment i s n ot i ssued a t t he f irst h earing, the p arties n ot d omiciled i n t he p lace w here
the c ourt o r the Justice o f the P eace s its are r equired t o e lect domicile t here.
The election of d omicile m ust be m entioned i n t he court record; f ailing t his election, a ny notification w ill b e validly made
to the c ourt registry.
Article 3 3 — I f, a fter e xamination o f a case, i t is necessary t o order that f acts o r documents be verified o r t hat a p arty be
questioned, this shall b e d one in a ccordance w ith the forms a nd conditions determined b y this code.
If a p arty i s u nable t o a ppear, a judge m ay be a ppointed by rogatory o rder t o hear them.
Article 3 4 — T he judicial oath r egulated b y A rticles 1 357 t o 1369 o f the Civil Code is ordered b y a j udgment. T his j udgment
will state t he f acts on w hich i t w ill be r eceived.
Article 3 5 — T he oath shall be t aken b y t he party i n p erson a nd a t t he hearing.
In the e vent of a legitimate a nd duly n oted impediment, the oath m ay be taken b efore the judge appointed b y the court,
who will attend t he p arty's visit, assisted by t he clerk.
If t he p arty to w hom the oath i s administered i s r emote, the court may order t hat h e or she take the oath before the court
of the p lace of h is o r her r esidence.
In all c ases, the o ath shall b e t aken in t he presence o f the other party w here they s hall b e duly s ummoned.
No formal f ormula i s required. The p arty swears to tell t he truth.
TITLE III
From communication to public prosecution.
Article 3 6 — T he following c auses will b e c ommunicated t o the public p rosecutor:


1° Those which c oncern p ublic order, the State, the Territory, d omains, m unicipalities, p ublic
establishments, donations and legacies f or the benefit o f the poor;
2° Those which c oncern the s tatus o f persons a nd g uardianships;
3° The declinatories o n incompetence;
4° The regulations of Judges, t he challenges and r eferrals f or k inship and a lliance;
5° The attacks;
6° The causes o f women n ot a uthorized by their h usbands, or e ven authorized, when i t
it c oncerns their dowry, a nd that t hey are married u nder the dotal regime, t he causes of m inors,
and g enerally all those w here o ne o f the parties i s d efended by a c urator;
7° C auses c oncerning o r i nvolving p ersons presumed t o be absent.
The P ublic P rosecutor m ay n evertheless take n otice o f all other c ases i n which h e believes h is role is
necessary; the c ourt o r the Justice o f the Peace with extended j urisdiction may e ven order i t ex o fficio.
Article 3 7 — Before the J ustices of the P eace w ith extended j urisdiction, cases s imply
communicable are judged without intervention of t he public p rosecutor. B efore these same courts, t he
The r ight to b e a principal party i s exercised b y the Public Prosecutor having t he right t o do so.
requisition.
TITLE IV
Judgments.
Article 3 8 — Judgments shall be written i n minutes. T hey shall state that t hey w ere delivered i n public
hearing a nd shall clearly indicate t he d ate on which t hey were delivered. T hey s hall contain the names o f
the m agistrates a nd the c lerk w ho presided.
Article 3 9 — Judgments shall also c ontain t he names, professions, a nd d omiciles of the parties, t he
document initiating the p roceedings and t he operative p art of the conclusions, the grounds and t he
operative part. It shall be indicated w hether the parties a ppeared in person o r b y proxy, or w hether the judgment w as b ased on s ubmissions.
Article 4 0 — (Art. 34 of the d ecree of 27 November 1 947).- J udgments r endered during mobile c ourt
hearings are transcribed w ithout delay b y t he clerk o r, failing t hat, b y the judge in a s pecial register, a nd
also c ontain ordinary statements, t he summary o f the conclusions o f the parties. T hey indicate
also t he n ame o f t he agent w ho w as responsible for g iving t he notice t o a ppear, t he time limit w hich was s et by the
judge for t he a ppearance a nd the place w here t he hearing w as held, all under p enalty of nullity.
Article 4 1 — The clerk w rites a t t he hearing in a r egister n umbered a nd i nitialed by the Judge, t he operative
part o f t he judgment a t t he very moment it i s pronounced; h e also takes note i n h is record b ook of any
incidents which m ay o ccur during t he hearing.
Article 4 2 — The president o r the justice o f the peace a nd t he clerks will sign e ach judgment w ithin a
maximum period o f f ive days from t he day of its pronouncement.
The c lerk is e xpressly p rohibited from i ssuing a c opy of a j udgment b efore it h as b een s igned, under
penalty of being p rosecuted a s a forger.
Article 4 3 — The clerks a re specially r esponsible, u nder t he supervision of the judge, f or d rafting t he
qualities w hich c omprise the d ocument initiating p roceedings a nd t he operative p art of t he parties' c onclusions.


Article 4 4 — I n c ases w here t he c ourts m ay g rant t ime l imits for the e xecution o f t heir
judgments, they will d o s o by the v ery judgment w hich will rule on the d ispute, and which will state t he
reasons for the delay.
The t ime limit will r un f rom the d ay o f t he j udgment, i f it is c ontradictory, and from the day o f notification, if it is b y default.
Article 4 5 — T he debtor may n ot o btain a delay, nor benefit from the d elay granted to him, i f his
assets a re sold at t he r equest of o ther creditors, if he is i n a state o f b ankruptcy, in c ontumaciousness, nor when,
by h is action, he will h ave r educed the s ecurities which he had given by the c ontract t o h is c reditor, nor finally w hen t he
law p rohibits all d elays.
Article 4 6 — T he protective acts s hall b e valid, notwithstanding t he time l imit g ranted.
Article 4 7 — I nterlocutory judgments r endered i n t he p resence of t he parties o r their
representative will n ot b e sent. In t he e vent t hat the j udgment o rders a n operation to w hich
the parties should attend, i t w ill i ndicate the p lace, day a nd time. T he parties w ill then b e summoned
by t he clerk and the s ummons w ill b e considered a citation.
Article 4 8 — A ll judgments w hich o rder d amages s hall c ontain t he liquidation thereof, or order t hat they b e given by
statement.
Article 4 9 — J udgments which o rder r estitution of fruits s hall o rder t hat it be made
in kind for the l ast y ear and, f or previous y ears, a ccording to m arket p rices
the nearest, t aking i nto a ccount the s easons and the c ommon p rices of the y ear; otherwise according t o experts, in t he
absence of market prices. I f r estitution in k ind f or t he last y ear i s i mpossible, i t will be made as f or previous y ears.
Article 5 0 — A ny unsuccessful party s hall be ordered to p ay t he c osts.
However, costs m ay b e compensated i n w hole or in p art, between spouses, a scendants,
descendants, brothers a nd sisters or r elatives in t he s ame degree: the j udges may also compensate the
costs in whole or i n p art, if t he p arties respectively fail o n any c ount.
Article 5 1 — D efense lawyers and bailiffs or e nforcement a gents who have e xceeded the l imits
of their ministry, the g uardians, curators, b eneficiary heirs or other a dministrators w ho will have
compromised the i nterests o f their a dministration, m ay be ordered to p ay t he c osts, i n t heir n ame and
without repetition, e ven to d amages i f a pplicable, without p rejudice to t he p rohibition against
defense lawyers, bailiffs a nd enforcement and dismissal agents against g uardians a nd others,
depending on the seriousness o f t he circumstances.
Article 5 2 — T he defense attorneys m ay r equest t he d iversion of c osts in t heir f avor, b y stating, when t he j udgment i s
delivered, that t hey have m ade t he g reater part of t he a dvances. T he diversion of costs may only b e ordered b y the
judgment w hich c ondemns them; i n t his case, the t ax w ill be pursued and the e nforcement order i ssued in t he name of
the defense attorney.
Article 5 3 — I f a n interim a pplication has b een filed a nd the c ase i s r eady o n the i nterim and on the m erits, t he j udges will
be r equired to rule o n t he w hole i n a single judgment.
Article 5 4 — R egardless of t he c ases where i t i s p rescribed b y law and except when it is e ither
prohibited by a text, or e xcluded d ue to t he n ature o f the c ase, t he p rovisional e xecution of the
final or preliminary judgments, c ontradictory or by default, m ay be ordered i f requested a nd only i n t he c ase o f urgency
or danger i n t he e vent o f d efault.
Article 5 5 — T he court which o rders p rovisional execution, f or a ll or part o nly o f the s entence, may make i t subject t o t he
provision o f a guarantee.


However, t here will be n o need to provide a g uarantee:
1° When t here i s e ither an u ncontested title, a uthentic o r private, or a recognized p romise o r agreement reached
between the parties before or d uring the p roceedings, or a previous conviction by judgment from w hich t here is
no appeal;
2° When i t c oncerns t he provisional execution o f a judgment ordering an investigative measure;
3° W hen p rovisional execution, not b eing l ikely t o c ause damage giving r ise to c ompensation, has been o rdered
subject t o the condition that the sums t o b e derived from s aid e xecution will b e subject t o a deposit governed by
Article 5 7.
Article 5 6 — T he security t hat the applicant for p rovisional enforcement m ust provide, w here applicable, w ill b e specified
in the j udgment ruling on the latter and must be sufficient to c over a ny restitution a nd compensation.
It will c onsist in p articular of t he submission of a deposit in a ccordance with articles 2 59 et s eq. o f t his code, o r in t he
deposit of cash or s ecurities o f w hich t he court, on offers f rom t he a pplicant, w ill a rbitrate t he a mount a nd nature.
Article 5 7 — E xcept in c ases where the debt is o f a maintenance nature or compensation f or damage caused to t he p erson,
the c ondemned party may a void t he provisional e xecution b eing p ursued by obtaining from t he i nterim r elief judge
authorization t o deposit s ufficient cash or a ssets t o g uarantee, in p rincipal, interest and costs, the a mount o f t he
condemnation.
From t he m oment the said sentence h as been c arried out, the g uarantees p rovided by the p arty in w hose favour the
provisional execution h as been pronounced, having become without o bject, will b e released.
Article 5 8 — T he deposit o r consignment r eferred to i n t he t wo p receding a rticles will b e made t o t he C aisse d es dépôts et
consignations or i nto the hands o f a notary or a b anking establishment a ppointed f or this purpose, in a ccordance with the
procedures set o ut in t he decision p rescribing t hem.
They will c arry special assignment and privilege of a rticle 2073 of t he C ivil C ode f or the b enefit of t he p arty for security o f
the r ights of w hich t hey were c arried out.
Article 5 9 — I f t he party has neglected t o r equest provisional e nforcement o r if the j udges have failed t o r ule on the r equest
made, provisional enforcement can no longer be granted b y a second j udgment, b ut, in a ll cases, i t may s till be requested
on a ppeal under the conditions of A rticle 2 04 o f t his Code or o n opposition.
Article 6 0 — P rovisional enforcement m ay n ot b e o rdered for costs, even if they a re a warded i n l ieu of d amages.
Article 6 1 — ( Order No. 7 2/21 o f O ctober 1 9, 1 972).-
Copies o f orders, j udgments, court orders, as w ell as copies o f c ontracts and all acts s ubject t o f orced execution, are
covered b y the enforceable formula i ntroduced as follows:
"Republic of C ameroon"
"In the n ame of the Cameroonian people"
and e nded with t he following s tatement:


"Consequently, the President o f the Republic o f Cameroon orders and commands all Bailiffs a nd
Enforcement A gents o n this r equest t o put this order ( or j udgment, etc.) i nto e xecution, and the
Attorneys G eneral and L aw E nforcement Officers t o lend a ssistance w hen l egally r equired to d o s o."
"
"In w itness w hereof t his j udgment has been signed b y
[Old form:
(D. of J une 1 2, 1 947).- T he e nforceable c opies o f judgments will be t itled as follows:
"Federal Republic of Cameroon"
"In the n ame o f t he C ameroonian people"
and t erminated b y the following f ormula:
"Consequently, the Federal Republic o f Cameroon o rders and orders all bailiffs on t his
required to enforce t his j udgment (or order), to the Attorneys General a nd to the Attorneys of the
Republic near t he courts of first i nstance to hold t he h and there, to a ll commanders and officers
of the public force t o lend a ssistance when legally r equired to do s o.
"In w itness w hereof, this j udgment has been s igned by t he President a nd the clerk.
]
TITLE V
Default judgments and o ppositions.
Article 6 2 — If one o f the parties f ails to appear o n the d ay specified in the summons, t he case s hall b e
judged b y d efault unless t he appearing party c onsents to an a djournment. In the event that t he t ime
limits are n ot observed, if t he defendant fails t o a ppear, the j udge shall o rder t hat h e b e r e-summoned
and the costs o f t he first summons s hall b e b orne by t he plaintiff.
If the party appears b efore the e nd o f the h earing where t he c ase w as d eliberated, the j udge may a lways
dismiss t he default and r eopen the p roceedings.
If neither party a ppears, the president m ay o rder t he case t o be s truck out.
All e xcept where it i s pleaded o n brief. T he party who a ppeared in the p roceedings m ay n o longer b e i n
default.
Article 6 3 — If the judge knows by himself o r by r epresentations m ade to him at the hearing
by t he defendant's close neighbors o r friends that t he l atter could not be i nformed of t he procedure, h e may
order the r eassignment; i n t he event t hat t he extension h as neither b een granted automatically n or
requested, the defaulter m ay b e relieved of the strictness of t he deadline and allowed t o o bject b y j ustifying t hat
due to absence or serious illness o r proven i mpediment, he c ould not be i nstructed i n the procedure.
Article 6 4 — Default w ill be p ronounced at the h earing and the conclusions o f the p arty requesting i t w ill b e
awarded i f they are fair a nd w ell-founded; t he judge may n evertheless h ave t he documents placed o n
the table to p ronounce the judgment a t the n ext h earing.
Where s everal parties have b een s ummoned for t he same purpose at different t imes, n o d efault shall
be t aken against a ny of them until t he e xpiry o f the longest t ime l imit.


Article 65 — If, o f two or m ore p arties s ummoned, n ot a ll a ppear, the p arties
defaulters will, u pon expiry of the a djournment periods, b e reassigned by bailiff o r a gent
execution w ith mention. In t he reassignment that t he j udgment t o b e made will h ave the e ffects of a
contradictory j udgment.
At t he end of the new a djournment periods, a single judgment b etween all parties will be issued.
The same shall apply, e ven if t here a re only t wo p arties involved, i f, after having agreed to a n adjournment
and noted the default, t he appearing p arty proceeds i n the s ame manner a s a bove to t he r eassignment
of the defaulting p arty t o t he person in q uestion.
Article 66 — All judgments r endered b y d efault are s ubject t o o pposition. This o pposition i s o nly
admissible for a f ortnight, s tarting f rom the d ay of p ersonal s ervice; d uring t his p eriod
is a dded to that d etermined in A rticles 1 4 or 1 5. T he s ervice m ade by the b ailiff o r by the a gent
execution m ust, u nder penalty o f n ullity, mention in very c lear c haracters t he d eadline f or opposition
fortnight and distance period.
During t his period, t he judgment m ay n ot b e executed u nless, in case o f e mergency or d anger i n the
remains, p rovisional execution h as not b een ordered before t he e xpiry o f t he s aid time l imits, w ith or without
surety, in t he cases p rovided for i n A rticles 5 4 e t seq. of t his C ode.
Article 67 — If s ervice has not b een made on t he p erson o f t he d efaulter, t he o pposition w ill b e admissible
as l ong as t he judgment h as not b een executed in full v iew of t he d efaulter, o r d uring the m onth following
the defaulter's k nowledge of t he judgment.
If it has b een impossible t o give t he d efaulter notice o f a n act of e xecution as j ust s tated, the j udgment
will b e published a s a n e xtract in a n ewspaper o f t he l ast known domicile.
This journal w ill b e d esignated b y o rder at t he r equest o f t he p resident o f t he c ourt w hich rendered the j udgment.
The extract will c ontain exclusively the date of t he j udgment w ith an indication of t he c ourt w hich
rendered i t, t he names, first n ames, p rofessions and d omiciles o r r esidences of t he p arties indicated in the judgment.
Finally, i t w ill s pecify that n o objection w ill be admissible after a p eriod o f o ne m onth if the d efaulter
resides in C ameroon, a period to w hich will be added in other c ases t hose p rovided f or by article 14 o f
this code.
Article 68 — The judgment i s d eemed to b e executed w hen the s eized f urniture has been s old o r the
sentenced has b een recommended o r that t he s eizure o f o ne o r m ore of h is buildings has been notified to him o r
that t he costs h ave been paid, o r, finally, when there is s ome act from w hich it necessarily r esults that
the execution o f the judgment h as b een m ade known to t he d efaulting p arty; t he o pposition f iled w ithin
the time l imits above a nd in t he f orms prescribed b elow suspends the e xecution, i f it has not b een ordered
notwithstanding o pposition.
Article 69 — The opponent's writ shall summarily contain the g rounds for his opposition and s hall be
served o n t he defendant i n o pposition w ith s ummons o n t he n ext h earing d ay, while o bserving t he t ime
limits prescribed for s ummons b y A rticles 1 4 a nd 1 5.
Any r equest for o pposition n ot f iled within the t ime l imits w ill render the o pposition i nadmissible, except
as p rovided for i n A rticle 6 3.
If the opposition is u pheld, the j udge will restore the p arties to t he p osition they w ere in before a nd w ill
rule by a n ew j udgment w hich may, if n ecessary, be the p ure and s imple confirmation o f t he f irst judgment.
Article 70 — An o pposition may n ot b e a ccepted against a j udgment w hich has dismissed a f irst
opposition.


Article 7 1 — T he opposition of a d efaulting party to a judgment rendered contradictorily w ith another party h aving the
same interest w ill not be admissible.
Article 7 2 — D efault j udgments m ust b e executed w ithin t welve m onths of their receipt, otherwise t hey are d eemed void.
TITLE VI
Exceptions.
Section I
OF THE S ECURITY T O B E PROVIDED BY F OREIGNERS.
Article 7 3 — S ubject t o guardianship a greements and i nternational conventions, all foreigners,
main applicants o r i nterveners, will b e required, if t he defendant so requests b efore any
exception, to p rovide s ecurity, t o pay t he c osts and d amages t o which t hey may b e ordered.
Article 7 4 — T he judgment ordering t he s ecurity will set t he amount up t o which
it w ill b e provided; t he a pplicant who deposits t his s um or who proves that h is buildings
located i n Cameroon are s ufficient t o meet t his requirement w ill be exempt f rom p roviding a deposit.
Section I I
REFERENCES.
Article 7 5 — T he party w ho has b een summoned before a court other than that which i s t o hear t he dispute m ay r equest
that it b e referred t o t he c ompetent j udges.
Article 7 6 — I t will be r equired to make this request prior t o any other exceptions and d efenses.
Article 7 7 — I f, nevertheless, the c ourt were incompetent o n t he matter, referral m ay b e requested in any event; a nd i f
referral was not requested, t he c ourt shall b e required to refer of its own motion.
However, referral may n ot be ordered if t he e xception r aised is b ased on t he civil or commercial n ature of the dispute.
In such cases, i t will be u p t o the c ourt to a dmit only civil or commercial e vidence depending o n t he case.
Article 7 8 — I f an application for t he s ame purpose has previously been f iled in another court,
or if t he dispute is related to a c ase a lready pending i n another court, t he referral m ay b e
requested and ordered.
Article 7 9 — A ny request f or referral will b e judged w ithout it b eing able t o be r eserved or joined t o the main c ase.
Section I II
DILATORY EXCEPTIONS.
Article 8 0 — T he heir, t he w idow, t he d ivorced or separated w oman, assigned a s common,
will have t hree months f rom t he d ay o f the o pening o f the succession o r dissolution of the community to make


inventory, a nd f orty days t o deliberate; i f t he i nventory w as m ade before t he t hree months, the f orty-day
period w ill b egin f rom t he d ay it w as completed.
If t hey p rove that the i nventory c ould n ot b e made within three months, they w ill be g iven a s uitable period of
time t o d o so, and f orty d ays t o deliberate, which w ill be s ettled b y t he j udge.
The h eir n evertheless retains, a fter expiry o f t he t ime l imits granted above, the r ight to s till m ake an i nventory
and t o d eclare himself a beneficiary h eir, if h e h as n ot o therwise m ade an a ct of h eir, or i f there is no judgment
against him w hich has become res judicata a nd condemns him as s uch.
of p ure a nd simple heir.
Article 8 1 — A ctions for warranty s hall be b rought within the t ime limits provided f or in Articles 14 a nd 15 o f
this C ode.
Article 8 2 — Successive actions for sub-guarantee w ill a lso be brought within t he t ime limits o f Articles 14 and 15.
Article 8 3 — I f, n evertheless, t he o riginal defendant is summoned within the t ime l imits to m ake an i nventory and
deliberate, t he t ime limit f or calling a g uarantor will only b egin f rom the d ay o n which t hose t o m ake inventory and
deliberate w ill h ave e xpired.
Article 8 4 — T here s hall b e n o f urther time limit f or calling upon a g uarantor, i n a ny m atter w hatsoever, u nder
pretext o f m inority or other privileged cause; e xcept to p ursue t he g uarantors but w ithout t he j udgment of t he
main claim being d elayed.
Article 8 5 — I f t he t ime limits for warranty c laims have n ot e xpired a t t he s ame time a s t hat of t he
original claim, n o d efault shall b e taken against t he o riginal defendant, w hen, b efore
the expiry of the t ime limit, h e will h ave d eclared, by a ct f rom lawyer t o l awyer, or, or b y n otification t o t he
opposing p arty, t hat he h as filed his c laim in warranty; u nless the d efendant, a fter t he e xpiry o f t he t ime l imit
for calling t he g uarantor, does not justify t he c laim in w arranty, t o u phold
the original c laim, e ven t o condemn him t o damages, i f the w arranty claim
by him a lleged is f ound not t o have b een formed.
Article 8 6 — I f t he o riginal a pplicant claims that there is no time limit f or calling a g uarantor, t he i ncident will
be judged i mmediately.
Article 8 7 — T hose w ho a re assigned as a guarantee shall b e r equired to p roceed b efore t he c ourt w here t he
original claim i s p ending, even if t hey deny b eing g uarantors; b ut i f it appears in w riting, or b y e vidence o f t he
fact, t hat t he o riginal claim was only m ade to t ake them out o f t heir c ourt, t hey s hall be r eferred to i t.
Article 9 8 — A s a formal guarantee, for real o r mortgage matters, t he g uarantor may always take up the c ause
of t he guaranteed party, w ho will b e exonerated, if he s o r equests before the f irst j udgment.
However, the g uarantor, although e xcluded, may request that he r emain there for the p reservation of h is
rights and t he o riginal applicant may request that he r emain t here for the p reservation of h is own.
Article 8 9 — I n s imple guarantee, the g uarantor m ay only i ntervene, w ithout taking up the c ause o f t he
guarantor.
Article 9 0 — I f t he o riginal a nd g uaranteed c laims are ready to b e j udged a t t he s ame time, t here is
will b e granted jointly; otherwise t he o riginal applicant may have h is application judged
separately; t he s ame j udgment will r ule o n the d isjunction, i f the t wo instances h ave been j oined;
except, after judgment o n t he p rincipal, t o u phold the g uarantee, i f applicable.
Article 9 1 — J udgments rendered against formal g uarantors shall b e e nforceable against t he g uaranteed.


It will b e s ufficient to report t he judgment to t he g uarantors, w hether they have b een e xonerated, or w hether they have
assisted, w ithout t he need f or any other r equest o r procedure. With regard t o costs, damages a nd
interests, liquidation and e xecution m ay o nly b e made against the g uarantors.
However, in the event of t he guarantor's i nsolvency, t he guarantor shall b e l iable for c osts, unless he h as b een e xonerated;
he shall a lso be liable for damages, if t he court c onsiders t hat this i s a ppropriate.
Article 9 2 — Dilatory e xceptions w ill be proposed j ointly and before a ny d efenses o n t he m erits.
Article 9 3 — The heir, t he w idow a nd t he divorced or separated w oman may o nly s ubmit their dilatory e xceptions after the
deadlines for taking inventory and d eliberating h ave e xpired.
Section IV
OF T HE C OMMUNICATION O F T HE PARTS.
Article 9 4 — The list o f d ocuments which o ne of t he p arties i ntends t o use w ill be m entioned i n its
conclusions or b riefs. The opposing party may e ven r equest c ommunication by l etter
of the said d ocuments. T hese will be f iled and c ommunicated w ithout travel t o t he r egistry of the
jurisdiction seized.
Article 9 5 — The time l imit for communication shall b e e ight days f rom the d ate o f f iling. T he filer shall i nform the o pposing
party of this date.
Article 9 6 — Any documents not m entioned i n t he briefs, s ummonses o r c onclusions o f a party o r whose c ommunication
has b een r efused will b e rejected f rom t he p roceedings, e ven e x officio b y t he judge.
Article 9 7 — All e xceptions, r equests f or nullity, grounds o f inadmissibility a nd a ll declinatories referred t o i n the p receding
articles except t he exception o f i ncompetence rationae materiae and t he e xception o f communication of d ocuments, w ill
be declared i nadmissible if t hey are presented a fter the merits h ave b een concluded.
The exception of surety must be p resented f irst.
The exception of relative i ncompetence must be p resented a fter that of surety a nd before a ny o ther.
All other exceptions, r equests f or nullity, grounds f or i nadmissibility a nd a ll other d eclinatories
must be o ffered s imultaneously and n one will be r eceived after a judgment r uling on o ne of t hem.
TITLE VII
On t he verification o f w ritings and the f alse c ivil i ncident.
Article 9 8 — If o ne of the p arties alleges the f alsity of a private d ocument, i t i s u p t o t he p erson who intends t o u se t his
document t o prove its sincerity.
Article 9 9 — If i t i s a p ublic or a uthentic document, it i s u p to t he p arty w ho claims its f alsity to p rove that the document i s
false o r falsified.
Article 1 00 — T he e vidence r eferred to i n the p receding a rticles shall b e p rovided in accordance with the law
common.
TITLE VIII


Investigations.
Article 101 - If t he parties d isagree o n f acts that c an b e established b y witnesses, and the v erification of
which t he c ourt f inds r elevant and a dmissible, it will o rder t he p roof, d etermining t he s ubject i n a p recise
manner a nd w ill s et t he date o f t he investigation i n public h earing.
The i nvestigation, always a dversarial, is either p rincipal or incidental, and m ay in e ither case, i f there i s
urgency, be o rdered by t he interim r elief j udge.
Article 102 — Proof to t he contrary shall be by right; the p roof of t he a pplicant and t he p roof to t he c ontrary
shall b e b egun a nd completed w ithin t he t ime limits s et b y the j udge i n the j udgment o rdering the
investigation.
Article 103 — Witnesses shall be summoned t o a ppear by summons a ddressed to them by the c lerk.
The s ummons w ill m ention the provisions o f A rticle 104.
Article 104 — Witnesses affected by the contravention who d o not appear may be summoned at t heir own
expense b y t he bailiff or enforcement o fficer.
If the summoned witnesses are s till i n default, the j udge m ay sentence t hem to a fine n ot exceeding 2,000
francs.
Article 105 — The d efaulting w itness m ay be discharged from t he f ine a nd t he c osts o f r e-assignment i f h e
proves that he w as u nable t o appear o n t he d ay i ndicated.
If the witness p roves t hat h e is unable t o appear o n the d ay i ndicated, t he c ourt will grant him s ufficient
time o r w ill t ravel, accompanied by t he clerk, t o r eceive his t estimony.
When the w itnesses are r emoved, the court will give letters r ogatory to t he j udge o f t he p lace w here they a re
find who will h ear t hem; this m agistrate m ay h imself a ppoint a Justice o f the P eace for this p urpose
ordinary competence.
Article 106 — On the day i ndicated, the witnesses, a fter having stated their name, profession, age and r esidence,
shall d eclare w hether t hey are r elatives o r a llies o f the p arties and t o what degree and w hether t hey are
their servants o r domestics and s hall take a n oath to t ell the t ruth.
Article 107 — Witnesses shall be heard s eparately i n the p resence o f the p arties, i f they appear, o r their
counsel o r agents. The p arties or their c ounsel or agents
will b e r equired to p rovide their a ccusations before t he w itnesses testify a nd t o sign them. I f the p arties
are u nable o r unable t o s ign, this will b e noted.
Article 108 — The p arents or relatives of either p arty m ay be held responsible,
up to a nd i ncluding t he fourth degree, a nyone w ho h as d runk o r eaten w ith one o f t he p arties a nd a t t heir e xpense
since t he j udgment which o rdered the investigation; the s ervants a nd d omestics, the p rosecution w itness and
the witness sentenced to e motional o r infamous punishment.
Article 109 — The j udge will decide a nd i f the a ccusation is upheld, the w itness w ill not be heard.
The r eproach is also o ptional.
Article 110 — Individuals u nder the age o f f ifteen may be heard, unless their depositions are g iven s uch
consideration a s is r easonable.


Article 111 — The parties shall n ot q uestion t he witnesses t hemselves; after t he d epositions, t he j udge m ay, a t the r equest
of the parties or even ex o fficio, make a ny a ppropriate q uestioning of the w itness.
Article 1 12 — In a ll c ases, t he c lerk s hall draw up a report of the h earing o f witnesses
; t his a ct w ill c ontain their n ame, a ge, p rofession and r esidence, t heir o ath t o tell t he t ruth, their
declaration i f t hey are relatives or a llies o r servants of the p arties a nd t he a ccusations w hich w ill have been made
against them.
The m inutes w ill b e read to each witness for the p art that c oncerns them, they w ill sign t heir s tatement or i t will be
mentioned that t hey do not k now o r cannot.
The r eport will a lso b e signed by the j udge and the c lerk; the case w ill be judged immediately o r a t t he first u seful
hearing.
The p resence of t he p ublic p rosecutor at i nvestigations i s optional.
TITLE IX
Raids on t he premises.
Article 1 13 — The court may, if i t d eems i t n ecessary, v isit the scene. It
will set t he d ay and t ime o f the t ransport. A r eport w ill be drawn up of this o peration. It will be signed b y the
judge a nd the c lerk. Any o ther judge may b e appointed by rogatory process i f necessary.
The p resence of t he p ublic p rosecutor is optional d uring on-site r aids.
Witnesses m ay b e heard at t he s cene.
Article 1 14 — The interim r elief judge may p roceed a s s tated above i n t he event of an emergency.
Article 1 15 — The transport c osts will b e advanced by the a pplicant a nd d eposited b y him w ith the r egistry.
TITLE X
Expert r eports.
Article 1 16 — If n ecessary, d uring a r eport or b efore a ny t rial, d uring the inspection o r a ssessment
of objects, w orks o r goods, o ne or t hree experts w ill be appointed by the c ourt or i n case of emergency b y the interim
relief judge.
The p arties m ay a gree o n the c hoice of experts. In the e vent of disagreement between t he p arties, t he court w ill appoint
the e xperts ex o fficio.
The purpose of the e xpert appraisal will be clearly stated i n t he judgment, which must s et t he time limit within which
the expert appraisal m ust be c arried o ut.
Experts may be challenged o n the g rounds f or which w itnesses may be held l iable.
The r ecusal of e xperts may o nly be proposed w ithin f ifteen days of their a ppointment.
will t ake p lace i n t he f orms p rovided for in A rticle 164.
She w ill be judged a t t he f irst hearing. The judgment on the c hallenge w ill be enforceable n otwithstanding the a ppeal.
Article 1 17 — If t he c hallenge i s u pheld, a n ew expert or e xperts w ill be appointed ex o fficio by the s ame judgment to
replace t he one or those challenged.


Article 1 18 — If the challenge is r ejected, the party who made i t w ill b e ordered to pay such d amages a s
are d ue, e ven t o t he expert, if he s o r equests; but i n the l atter case, h e may n ot remain an expert.
Article 1 19 — The e xperts shall t ake t he o ath on t he date f ixed b y the j udgment which a ppointed them.
They m ay be e xempted from the oath b y the parties. T he most d iligent p arty will s ummon t he e xperts t o
take t he oath a nd p roceed with t heir operations.
The e xpert w ill make his refusal known w ithin eight d ays o f this s ummons or at the latest t he day before
the hearing a t w hich h is oath m ust be t aken.
Article 1 20 — The e xperts will i ndicate to t he parties the p lace, d ay and time o f their operations, t hey w ill
be given the judgment w hich o rdered the r eport a nd the necessary documents.
The p arties a nd a ny other p arties involved m ay b e heard by experts, i f n ecessary.
Article 1 21 — If an e xpert does not a ccept h is appointment, the parties shall a gree to appoint o ne in his
place, o r otherwise the appointment m ay b e made b y order of the p resident of the court a t
the request o f t he most d iligent party.
Article 1 22 — An e xpert who, after h aving a ccepted h is appointment, d oes n ot fulfil h is mission, m ay b e
ordered by the court to p ay all the c osts i ncurred and e ven d amages u nless he can prove a l egitimate
impediment.
Article 1 23 — The c osts and f ees o f the e xperts w ill b e advanced b y the party requesting t he expert appraisal
or by both parties i f t hey a gree.
When the expert appraisal is o rdered ex officio, t he advance w ill b e made b y the plaintiff a t the trial.
The expert may, if necessary, r equest an advance p ayment, s ubject t o a fee i n t he event of a dispute.
Article 1 24 — The e xperts will d raw up a s ingle r eport; they w ill f ormulate only o ne o pinion, b y majority v ote.
votes. The report will b e w ritten b y o ne of t he experts a nd s igned by all. They w ill f ile their report w ith the
registry w ithin t he t ime l imit s et by t he c ourt o r judge.
Article 1 25 — In t he e vent of d elay or refusal on the part o f the e xperts t o submit t heir report, they m ay
be summoned for t hree d ays b efore the court w hich a ppointed them.
It will be u p to t he court t o a ssess whether the delay i s a ttributable to the ill w ill o f the experts o r to
any other cause.
If the court o rders the expert to b e r eplaced, t he e xpert will b e ordered to pay the costs o f the incident.
Article 1 26 — The p arties may o btain communication of the report f rom the registry.
If necessary, t he most diligent p arty m ay l ift the r eport a nd have i t s erved on the o pposing party by bailiff
or enforcement o fficer.
The c ase w ill have t o b e c alled a t t he next hearing f ollowing t he filing o f the r eport.
Article 1 27 — If the court d oes not f ind sufficient clarification i n the report, it m ay
ex o fficio o rder a new e xpert appraisal b y o ne o r more experts w hom h e will a lso a ppoint e x officio
and w ho may a sk the previous experts f or any information t hey f ind a ppropriate.
Article 1 28 — The c ourt is not o bliged t o f ollow t he opinion o f experts i f i ts conviction is o pposed t o it.


TITLE X I
On t he personal a ppearance of the p arties and t heir questioning.
Article 129 — T he court m ay, i n any event a nd in any m atter, o rder e x o fficio or at t he r equest o f a ny o f t he p arties involved,
the personal a ppearance of the p arties.
Article 130 — T he appearance takes p lace b efore t he c ourt. T he judgment o rdering the a ppearance shall be f ixed by t he
parties on t he day and t ime. I n the e vent o f an excuse d eemed v alid, the n ew d ay a nd t ime s hall be f ixed by a n o rder i ssued
upon simple request.
Article 131 — T he request f or p ersonal appearance is m ade by w ay of c onclusions.
Article 132 — T he court, t he p arties or t heir c ounsel or agents called, shall rule in p ublic hearing b y j udgment n ot
prejudicing t he main i ssue.
Article 133 — T he parties m ust a ppear o n the d ay and t ime f ixed by t he j udgment. I n t he a bsence o f a n a ppearance without
a valid excuse, the court shall d ecide w hether the j udgment s hould be l ifted and s erved with a s ummons in p erson o r at
home by a bailiff o r e nforcement a gent appointed b y i t. I t s hall then set t he n ew day a nd time.
Article 134 — T he parties m ay b e questioned in each other's absence; in t his c ase they may then be c onfronted. They
shall a nswer the questions p ut t o them i n person and without being able to r ead any d raft.
Article 135 — T he parties' c ounsel may a ssist t hem a nd, after q uestioning b y t he c ourt, request t he c ourt to a sk a ny
questions they c onsider useful.
Article 136 — A r ecord shall b e kept o f the statements o f t he a ppearing parties. I t s hall be r ead to e ach party and
challenged to declare w hether they h ave s poken t he t ruth and p ersist. I f a party adds new statements, t he a ddition shall
be w ritten i n the margin or f ollowing t he examination; i t s hall be r ead to t hem and t he s ame challenge s hall be m ade to
them. The record shall be signed b y the president, t heir clerk and t he p arties; i f o ne o f t hem is u nable or unwilling to s ign,
this shall b e noted. The parties m ay obtain a c opy of t he r ecord.
Article 137 — I f t he parties o r o ne of them a re u nable t o a ppear, t he c ourt may a ppoint a j udge who w ill a ttend
accompanied b y a c lerk. In any e vent, the o pposing p arty will b e s ummoned b y t he c lerk a nd t he p ublic prosecutor, b ut
the latter only in proceedings that c an be communicated t o t he p ublic prosecutor.
Article 138 — I n the event o f the distance o f the parties o r one of t hem making travel t oo difficult o r too expensive, t he
court m ay e xceptionally, in order t o have t hem heard, t ogether o r separately d epending o n t he c ircumstances, i ssue a
letter of r equest to the court of the domicile o r r esidence o f o ne of t hem.
Article 139 — L egal p ersons a nd collective b odies e ntitled t o a ppear i n c ourt in t he p erson o f t heir l egal representatives,
persons l acking l egal c apacity t hemselves, their l egal representatives o r those assisting t hem, as w ell a s a gents of p ublic
administrations may be summoned to appear.
Article 140 — T he administrations o f public establishments or bodies are required to a ppoint a n a dministrator o r agent to
respond t o the summons, without prejudice to the r ight to d irectly s ummon administrators a nd agents to b e q uestioned
both on facts t hat a re p ersonal to them a nd on those that they have become aware of i n t heir c apacity a s a gents of t he
administration i n question.


Article 141 — I f o ne of the p arties does not a ppear or, a ppearing, r efuses t o r espond, the c ourt may, in a ll legal
consequences and in p articular, n ote the a bsence or refusal of
respond as e quivalent to a s tart of proof i n w riting under the c onditions o f a rticle 1 347 of t he c ivil c ode.
TITLE X II
Incidents.
Section I
INCIDENTAL R EQUESTS
Article 142 — I ncidental c laims shall b e m ade b y way of s ubmissions. The defendant
the i ncident w ill g ive i ts a nswer by t he same route.
Section I I
OF T HE INTERVENTION.
Article 143 — T he intervention w ill b e formed b y summons w hich w ill c ontain t he g rounds a nd c onclusions.
Article 144 — T he intervention m ay n ot delay t he j udgment o f t he p rincipal case, w hen i t is r eady.
TITLE X III
Resumption of proceedings.
Article 145 — T he judgment o f the case w hich i s r eady for h earing shall not b e delayed b y a change in t he s tatus of t he
parties or b y t he cessation of the functions i n w hich they w ere acting, nor by their death or by the d eath, resignation,
prohibition or d ismissal of their representatives ad litem.
Article 146 — T he case w ill b e r eady for h earing when the p leadings h ave begun.
Article 147 — I n c ases w hich a re n ot ready for trial, a ll proceedings m ade a fter
notification of the death of one of the p arties will b e null and v oid.
Article 148 — N either t he change o f status of the p arties nor the c essation o f t he f unctions in w hich they w ere acting shall
prevent t he continuation of the p roceedings.
Article 149 — T he summons f or r ecovery will b e g iven w ithin the t ime l imits s et u nder t he s ummons.
Article 150 — I f t he party summoned f or recovery c ontests, the i ncident will b e judged summarily.
Article 151 — I f a t t he end of the time limit t he party s ummoned f or r ecovery does n ot a ppear, it will b e rendered
judgment w hich will h old the case f or r esumption a nd will o rder that i t will p roceed, following t he l ast errors and w ithout
there being any o ther d eadlines than t hose which remained to r un.
Article 152 — T he judgment r endered b y d efault a gainst a party, o n the r equest for c ontinuation of p roceedings, will b e
served b y a b ailiff o r a n e nforcement o fficer.
TITLE X IV
Judges' r egulations.


Article 1 53 — I f a dispute is b rought before t wo o r m ore c ourts of peace falling u nder t he s ame c ourt, the s ettlement
of j udges will be b rought b efore t hat court.
If the Peace C ourts a re u nder d ifferent jurisdictions, the s ettlement of judges will be b rought b efore the C ourt o f
Appeal.
If these courts do not fall u nder the same Court o f A ppeal, the s ettlement will b e brought b efore the C ourt of C assation.
If a d ispute i s brought b efore t wo o r more c ourts o f first i nstance or j ustice of the p eace
extended j urisdiction falling w ithin t he j urisdiction of t he Court of A ppeal o f Cameroon, t he regulation o f judges w ill b e brought t o
this c ourt; it will be b rought t o the C ourt of Cassation, if t he c ourts do n ot a ll f all under t he s ame
Court o f A ppeal o r i f the c onflict exists b etween one or m ore c ourts.
Article 1 54 — O n the basis o f requests m ade in different courts, i t w ill be r endered, u pon r equest,
judgment granting permission t o sue in s ettlement, a nd the j udges may o rder that it b e s tayed
to a ll p roceedings in t he said c ourts.
Article 1 55 — T he a pplicant shall s erve the j udgment and summon t he p arties w ithin the t ime l imits p rovided f or i n
Articles 1 4 and 1 5 o f this Code.
The t ime limit f or appearing w ill be t hat p rovided f or in the s aid a rticles.
Article 1 56 — I f the plaintiff has not s erved notice within the a bove t ime l imits, h e s hall remain d eprived o f the
settlement of judges, without it b eing necessary t o have it o rdered; a nd proceedings m ay b e c ontinued i n the c ourt
seized b y t he defendant in s ettlement.
Article 1 57 — T he u nsuccessful a pplicant may be o rdered to pay d amages t o the o ther parties.
TITLE XV
From referral to another court f or kinship or a lliance or legitimate s uspicion a nd from recusal.
Article 1 58 — W hen a party h as two r elatives or r elatives by m arriage up t o the degree o f first c ousin
inclusive, a mong the judges of a court o f first instance, o r t hree r elatives or allies t o the s ame d egree i n the c ourt
of a ppeal, or w here he h as a relative t o the s aid d egree a mong t he j udges of the court of first i nstance, o r two
relatives i n the court o f appeal, and he h imself is a member of the tribunal o r of that court, t he other party m ay
request the r eferral.
Article 1 59 — A ny j udge m ay be c hallenged for the f ollowing r easons:
1° If he i s a relative o r relative o f the p arties, or of one of them, up t o the d egree o f first cousin inclusive;
2° If the judge's wife i s a relative o r r elative by m arriage, e mployer or e mployee of one of the p arties, or
if t he judge i s a relative o r relative o f the w ife of one of the p arties, to the above d egree, when the
woman is alive, or t hat being d eceased, there a re c hildren b y h er: i f s he i s d eceased, a nd there
there is no child, the f ather-in-law, the son-in-law, n or the b rothers-in-law may b e j udges;
The p rovision relating t o the d eceased w ife s hall apply t o the d ivorced w ife, i f there a re c hildren of the dissolved
marriage;
3° I f the judge, his wife, t heir ascendants and descendants, or r elatives in the s ame l ine, h ave a dispute on a
question s imilar to that i n question b etween the p arties;


4° If they h ave a lawsuit i n t heir name i n a court where o ne of the parties will be judge; if t hey are creditors or debtors
of o ne of t he p arties;
5° If, w ithin the five years preceding t he challenge, t here h as b een a c riminal trial between them a nd one o f the
parties, or their s pouse, or t heir p arents o r r elatives i n a d irect l ine;
6° If there i s a civil proceeding b etween the judge, his wife, t heir ascendants and descendants, o r relatives in the
same line, a nd one of t he parties, and that this l awsuit, if i t w as brought by the party, w as brought before
the i nstance in w hich the challenge i s p roposed; if t his trial having been c ompleted, it w as completed o nly within t he
six months preceding t he challenge;
7° If the j udge i s a guardian, subrogated g uardian or curator, presumptive heir or donee, master or commensal of
one of t he parties, if he i s a n a dministrator o f any e stablishment, c ompany o r management, p arty i n the case; i f o ne
of t he p arties is his presumed h eir;
8° If the j udge has given a dvice, p leaded or w ritten on the dispute; if h e has previously h eard i t a s
judge o r a s a rbitrator; if he h as requested r egistered o r provided a t the expense of the trial; if h e has filed as
witness; if, since t he beginning of the trial, h e has drunk o r eaten w ith either p arty
in their house, o r r eceived gifts f rom t hem;
9° If there i s capital e nmity b etween him and o ne o f the parties;
10° If there h as been, on h is part, a ggression, insults or threats, verbally or in writing, since t he proceedings or in
the s ix months p receding t he proposed recusal.
Article 1 60 — T here shall b e n o g rounds for r ecusal in cases w here t he judge i s r elated to the guardian o r the
curator of one of t he parties, o r o f the directors o f an establishment, c ompany, m anagement
or u nion, party i n t he cause, unless t he said guardians, administrators o r interested p arties have a s eparate or
personal i nterest.
Article 1 61 — T he grounds f or disqualification relating to judges are applicable t o the public prosecutor when h e is
a j oined party; but he i s n ot disqualifiable when h e is t he principal p arty.
Article 1 62 — T he referral o r c hallenge s hall b e requested b efore t he start o f the pleading.
From the r equest, a ll j udgment a nd operations w ill be suspended.
Article 1 63 — T he challenge a gainst j udges a ssigned t o raids, i nvestigations a nd other o perations may only be
proposed within three days:
1° If the judgment i s c ontradictory, from t he day o f judgment;
2° If the judgment i s b y d efault and there i s n o opposition, from t he day of expiry o f the opposition;
3° If the judgment w as rendered b y d efault or there w as an opposition, from t he day of the dismissal
opposition, even b y d efault.
Article 1 64 — T he referral a nd t he challenge w ill b e proposed b y declaration to the registry which w ill contain them
the m eans a nd will be s igned b y t he party o r the person acting o n behalf of his authentic a nd special power of attorney, w hich
will b e a ttached to t he declaration.
A copy will be g iven w ithin twenty-four hours b y the clerk t o the judges on whose grounds the referral is r equested
or t o t he c hallenged judges.
Article 1 65 — W ithin t he same period of t wenty-four h ours f rom t he delivery of the copy, t he judges will be required
to g ive t heir declaration in w riting, bearing o r acquiescence in the challenge,


or their refusal to abstain, with their responses to t he g rounds f or r ecusal or t heir observations o n t he r equest f or r eferral.
Article 1 66 — I n a ll c ases a nd whatever t he n ature of t hese responses or observations, or i f
If the judges refuse or a bstain from r esponding, the f ile is f orwarded within t wenty-four h ours of the d eclaration provided
for i n Article 1 64 t o the First President o f the C ourt o f A ppeal.
Article 1 67 — A ll r equests f or referral or r ecusal c oncerning magistrates o f the d istrict court a re s ubmitted b y t he first
president t o the civil c hamber o f the C ourt of A ppeal,
which r ules u rgently on t he conclusions of the A ttorney G eneral and o n the r eport o f a n a dvisor, w ithout
that it is n ecessary t o call t he parties.
Article 1 68 — I f t he declarant h as not p rovided w ritten proof or the b eginning o f proof of t he c auses o f
the challenge o r r equest f or referral, i t i s l eft to the p rudence of the c ourt s eized t o reject i t o n
the simple declaration of t he j udges or to o rder p roof of t he m eans produced.
Article 1 69 — I f t he challenge of a Justice o f the P eace w ith ordinary j urisdiction, o f a Justice of the P eace w ith
extended j urisdiction o f a c ourt p resident i s a dmitted, t he c ourt w ill refer the c ase to a magistrate of a neighboring
jurisdiction o f a s imilar o rder to that s eized.
Article 1 70 — I f t he challenged m agistrate is a m ember o f a court o f first i nstance, t he Court o f A ppeal
will r efer t he case t o another magistrate of t his jurisdiction or a ny o ther m agistrate s pecially
designated f or t his p urpose.
Article 1 71 — A ny magistrate who becomes aware t hat there i s a cause f or d isqualification i n his person shall b e required
to refer the matter t o the c ourt, w hich shall decide whether he s hould abstain. I f s o, the case shall b e r eferred b ack a s
stated in the preceding articles.
Article 1 72 — A ny request f or the disqualification o f a member of the C ourt o f A ppeal shall b e j udged by t he c ourt
itself i n general m eeting, o n t he report o f a n advisor a nd t he c onclusions o f the a ttorney g eneral, w ithout it b eing n ecessary
to call t he parties.
Article 1 73 — I f t he request f or referral is g ranted, t he c ourt o f a ppeal shall r efer the c ase to a
jurisdiction of a s imilar order to t hat s eized, specially designated f or t his p urpose. This will have t o
know by s imple summons; the p rocedure will be c ontinued f ollowing its o ld errors.
Article 1 74 — R equests for referral on g rounds of l egitimate s uspicion d irected against the c ourt i tself or a gainst a
chamber o f the court s hall be b rought before t he C ourt o f C assation.
Article 1 75 — A ny person w hose request f or referral or c hallenge has b een d eclared i nadmissible o r
inadmissible may be s entenced to a f ine of 5 00 t o 1 2,000 f rancs, w ithout prejudice, w here appropriate, to d amages.
TITLE XVI
From the expiration date.
Article 1 76 — A ny proceedings shall b e e xtinguished by d iscontinuance o f p roceedings for t hree y ears.
This period will be increased b y six m onths i n all cases where there i s a request f or c ontinuation o f proceedings.
Article 1 77 — T he l imitation p eriod s hall r un against the State, the Territory, p ublic establishments and all other p ersons,
even m inors, except t heir recourse against a dministrators and g uardians.
Article 1 78 — T he e xpiry t akes place automatically, b ut the defendant may w aive its r ight to i nvoke it.


Article 1 79 — The expiry is n ot the action; it o nly involves the extinction o f t he procedure,
without it b eing possible, in any c ase, t o oppose a ny o f the a cts o f t he e xtinguished procedure, nor to deny them
prevail.
In the e vent of l apse, t he p rincipal applicant i s ordered t o pay a ll c osts of t he expired procedure.
TITLE XVII
Of w ithdrawal.
Article 1 80 — The withdrawal may b e made and a ccepted b y s imple acts signed by t he p arties or t heir
representatives f iled with t he court registry. I t m ay also result f rom a d eclaration b y t he parties or t heir
representatives made a t t he hearing a nd r ecorded i n t he court r ecord.
In any case, i t w ill be a cknowledged without judgment.
Article 1 81 — The withdrawal, w hen accepted, w ill automatically imply consent that things be r eturned
on b oth sides t o t he same state a s they were before the r equest.
It w ill a lso e ntail s ubmission to p ay t he costs, t o w hich the party w hich has withdrawn w ill be o bliged t o
pay, b y s imple order of the P resident included a t the bottom of the t ax.
This o rder, if i t comes from a c ourt of f irst i nstance, w ill b e e xecuted n otwithstanding o pposition o r
appeal; it w ill b e executed notwithstanding opposition, if i t c omes f rom the C ourt of A ppeal.
TITLE XVIII
Referrals.
Article 1 82 — In all c ases of u rgency, o r when i t i s necessary t o r ule provisionally on difficulties relating
to the e xecution o f a n e nforceable title or a j udgment, the p rocedure s hall be a s set out b elow.
Article 1 83 — The application s hall be b rought t o a h earing held for t his p urpose b y t he President o f the
Court of First Instance or b y the J ustice o f t he Peace with extended jurisdiction, or b y t he j udge replacing
them, on t he d ay a nd at the t ime i ndicated by t he c ourt.
Article 1 84 — If, however, the case r equires s peed, the President or t he person r epresenting him m ay
allow t o summon, either t o t he hearing o r t o h is hotel, at the t ime indicated, even on holidays; and,
in this c ase, t he s ummons m ay only be given by v irtue o f t he order o f t he j udge who w ill appoint a b ailiff
or enforcement o fficer f or t his purpose.
Article 1 85 — Interim orders shall not c ause a ny prejudice t o t he main p roceedings; t hey shall be
enforceable provisionally, without security, i f t he j udge has n ot o rdered t hat one b e p rovided.
They will n ot be subject t o o pposition.
In cases w here t he l aw a uthorizes an appeal, this a ppeal m ay be l odged e ven before the p eriod of eight
days, f rom the d ate o f t he order; a nd it will not b e a dmissible if i t w as lodged after t he f ortnight, from
the d ay of s ervice of t he o rder.
The appeal w ill be heard u rgently.
Article 1 86 — The minutes of t he interim o rders s hall be f iled with t he registry.


Article 1 87 — I n c ases o f a bsolute n ecessity, t he judge m ay order the e xecution o f his order on t he o riginal.
BOOK II
From t he call.
SINGLE TITLE
From t he call.
Article 1 88 — T he C ourt of A ppeal h ears a ppeals from all judgments at first i nstance by t he courts o f first i nstance and
justices o f t he peace with extended j urisdiction.
The courts of first instance and t he j ustices o f the peace w ith extended j urisdiction hear a ppeals from all judgments
rendered at first instance by the j ustices o f t he peace w ith ordinary jurisdiction.
[See D. 2 47 o f 18-12-59 o n t he transitional provisions of t he j udicial o rganization and the devolution of the a ppeal (JOC, 5 9,
p. 1814)]
Article 1 89 — ( Art. 3 6 o f t he D. o f N ovember 27, 1947).- The a ppeal will be m ade by s imple request t o the m embers of the
appeal c ourt.
Article 1 90 — T he a ppeal request s hall c ontain the s tatements o f t he a pplication i nitiating o rdinary p roceedings, t he
grounds of the appeal a nd the a ppellant's conclusions.
A copy o f the judgment under appeal will be attached.
Article 1 91 — T he a ppeal request s igned by the party o r i ts r epresentative will be f iled w ith the registry of
the appeal court i n a s m any copies a s there are r espondents. It m ay be a ddressed there
by p ost, by registered m ail.
(Decree N o. 6 8/df/441 of N ovember 8, 1 968).-
As soon as i t h as b een r eceived, the c lerk will notify t he a ppellant o f t he a mount o f the d eposit t o be p aid; this d eposit
must, under penalty of f orfeiture of p ublic policy of the a ppeal, be m ade within f our m onths o f notification. T his period i s
interrupted by t he filing o f a r equest f or legal aid.
If the appellant d oes n ot r ecord a nd does n ot prove that he b enefits from legal a id, t he f orfeiture incurred i s noted, if
necessary e x o fficio by o rder without c osts of t he president o f
the Court o f Appeal. This order notified to the p arties m ay be a ppealed i n cassation in the
period of ordinary l aw from t he d ate of i ts notification. This n otification is m ade by
administratively or b y bailiff's w rit a nd in t he l atter case at the diligence o f t he r espondent.
The appellant may a lso be s entenced t o a c ivil f ine of 5 to 2 0,000 f rancs i n the e vent of a dilatory a ppeal.
If the deposit is p aid or i f t he b enefit of legal a id is proven, t he request w ill be r egistered.
-------- - ---------- ----------- ----------- - -----
[Old f orm of t he second p aragraph:


As soon as it h as b een received, i t w ill b e r ecorded i n t he r egistry by the c lerk i n a register provided for t his p urpose.
After i ts r egistration, the P resident of the a ppeal court will issue an order n oting t he r equest r eceived a nd setting a
deadline for t he r espondent t o file his d efenses and the d ate of the h earing.
Notice of t he motion and of the o rder m ade shall b e given by t he c lerk of the c ourt to the p arty
respondent o r i ts r epresentative. Notice o f the o rder will also be g iven to the a ppealing p arty.
receipt w ill b e w ithdrawn by t he c lerk.
If t he notice intended f or t he r espondent i s returned t o the r egistry with a n ote t hat i t was n ot delivered, t he c lerk will
notify t he a ppellant. T he a ppellant will t hen h ave h is appeal served as stated i n t he s ection "The
summonses" o bserving the t ime l imits for t he summons t o appear b efore the a ppeal court
referred to in Articles 1 3 a nd 14 of this decree.
]
Article 1 92 - (Art. 36 o f the d ecree o f November 27, 1 947).- The time limit for f iling an appeal will be three m onths plus
the time limits f or d istance i n Articles 1 4 a nd 15, e xcept in m atters where a s pecial text has p rovided o therwise.
Article 1 93 — T he time l imit f or a ppeal s hall be forfeited.
(Art. 3 6 o f D . 2 7 N ovember 1 947).- It w ill r un, for c ontradictory j udgments, from t he d ay o f the
service i n p erson o r at real o r elected domicile, f or j udgments by d efault, f rom the d ay o n which
the opposition will n o l onger b e admissible.
The respondent may n evertheless incidentally appeal in a ny e vent, even if he has s erved the j udgment w ithout
reservation.
Any a ppeal b rought about b y the m ain appeal w ill also be a dmissible in a ny e vent. However, it may not, u nder a ny
circumstances, delay t he r esolution of the m ain a ppeal.
The time limit f or a ppeal w ill r un against t he p erson who s erved t he j udgment f rom the d ay o f such s ervice.
The meaning, e ven without reservation, w ill n ot b ring acquiescence.
Article 194 — (Art. 3 6 of the D. of November 2 7, 1 947).- W ith r egard t o persons with d isabilities, t he time limit for appeal does not
will o nly run f rom the notification t o the p erson o r a t the h ome o f t hose w ho are r esponsible f or e xercising their r ights.
Article 1 95 — T he time l imit f or a ppeal s hall be suspended by the d eath of either party. It shall n ot
will r esume its c ourse o nly a fter the e xpiry of the f ortnight following t he n ew notification of the
judgment, made a t the d eceased's home, in the forms p rescribed in A rticle 7 a nd from the e xpiry of the t ime limits
for making a n i nventory a nd deliberating if t he j udgment w as s erved before t hese latter t ime limits h ad expired.
This notification may b e made t o the h eirs a nd representatives, collectively a nd without d esignation o f names and
capacities.
Article 1 96 — I n the c ase provided for i n the p receding article, service o f the n otice o f appeal may b e made i n t he
forms a nd to the p ersons i ndicated i n said a rticle.
But the appellant m ay o nly f ollow u p o n h is a ppeal after n otification has b een d elivered t o each o f the h eirs and
representatives a nd to his domicile.
Article 1 97 — I n the e vent t hat the j udgment w as r endered on a f alse document, or i f the p arty h ad
was condemned for n ot r epresenting a d ecisive p iece which was r etained b y h is opponent, t he


the t ime limits for appeal will o nly run f rom t he d ay on which t he f orgery has been recognized o r legally established, or
that the p art has b een recovered, provided that, i n t he l atter c ase, t here i s w ritten proof of t he d ay on which t he
part was r ecovered, a nd not o therwise.
Article 198 — I f d uring t he appeal p eriod a c hange occurs i n t he c ondition of o ne o f t he p arties,
the a ppeal period w ill b e s uspended and will n ot s tart running again u ntil eight days after a new
meaning expressly intended to apply this a rticle.
Article 199 — A n appeal against a j udgment before i t is g ranted may o nly b e lodged after t he j udgment
final a nd j ointly with the appeal of this judgment, a nd the t ime l imit f or t he a ppeal w ill o nly r un from t he d ay of s ervice o f
the f inal j udgment; this appeal will b e a dmissible, even if the p reliminary j udgment h as been executed without reservation.
Article 200 — J udgments deemed t o be f inal shall b e subject to a ppeal w hen they h ave been
rendered by j udges w ho could o nly rule in t he first instance.
Appeals a gainst j udgments r endered o n matters o ver which t he f irst i nstance judges have final j urisdiction, but w hich
they h ave f ailed to classify or w hich t hey have c lassified a t f irst i nstance, will n ot b e admissible.
Article 2 01 — W here t here is a q uestion of i ncompetence, the appeal shall b e admissible, e ven i f t he judgment h as been
qualified as a l ast r esort.
Article 202 — A ppeals a gainst judgments s ubject to a ppeal s hall be admissible even during the p eriod for a ppeal.
Article 203 — A n appeal lodged w ithin the legal t ime l imit w ill h ave suspensive effect, u nless p rovisional execution i s
ordered.
The e xecution o f judgments d eemed improperly qualified a s final j udgments m ay o nly b e suspended b y virtue of d efenses
obtained by the appellant a t t he hearing o f the a ppeal c ourt.
Article 204 — I n t he cases p rovided for in A rticle 5 9 of t his C ode, provisional execution w ill b e
requested by s imple petition before the a ppeal c ourt which will r ule i n a ccordance w ith t he p rovisions
of Articles 5 4 a nd following.
Article 205 — I f p rovisional execution has b een o rdered o utside t he c ases or conditions p rovided for b y law,
the a ppellant m ay o btain d efenses at t he h earing, on simple s ubmissions.
[See D F 5 81 of 3 D ec. 1966 - J OF 6 6 p . 1 851 o n the s uspension of p rovisional execution]
Article 206 — I n n o case m ay i t, u nder penalty of nullity, be granted in d efense, nor b e rendered
no j udgment o r o rder t ending to directly or i ndirectly stop t he e xecution o f t he j udgment a ppealed from.
Article 207 — N o new c laim shall b e m ade o n appeal, unless i t is f or c ompensation or the n ew claim i s a defense to the
main a ction.
The p arties may a lso r equest interest, arrears, rents a nd other accessories due.
since the j udgment a t f irst instance a nd damages for t he h arm s uffered s ince t he j udgment.
A request arising directly f rom the original r equest and aiming at t he s ame e nds, e ven if based on different c auses or
motives, c annot be c onsidered new.
Article 208 — I n t he cases p rovided for in t he preceding article, n ew requests and exceptions b y the d efendant m ay o nly
be made by s imple reasoned conclusions.


Article 2 09 — Anyone w ho c an demonstrate an interest may intervene i n t he appeal.
Article 2 10 — The lapse o f time i n the appeal p roceedings shall give the j udgment the force o f r es judicata, even if the
judgment has not b een served.
Article 2 11 — If t he j udgment is confirmed, enforcement s hall be t he responsibility o f t he court w hich rendered it.
If t he j udgment i s overturned in its e ntirety, enforcement b etween t he same p arties will b e a matter for the a ppellate court.
In t he e vent of partial reversal, t he appeal c ourt m ay either r etain e nforcement o r refer t he matter back to t he s ame c ourt
composed o f other j udges, i f it deems i t necessary, o r t o a nother court. A ll except i n c ases i n w hich the l aw c onfers
jurisdiction.
Article 2 12 — In the e vent o f an a ppeal a gainst a judgment w hich is p artly f inal and partly p reliminary, i f this decision is
overturned, the a ppeal c ourt may refer the c ase to t he Court provided t hat the m atter is c apable of r eceiving a final
decision.
The same will apply in the event that it o verturns o r a nnuls j udgments o n the m erits, either f or a formal defect o r f or any
other reason.
However, i n cases where the reversal i s pronounced f or violation of t he rules o f j urisdiction, the referral w ill a lways b e
ordered.
Article 2 13 — The principal appellant who i s unsuccessful m ay be s entenced t o a fine of 5 00 to
5,000 francs if t he a ppeal i s deemed abusive or d ilatory.
Article 2 14 — The other rules c oncerning t he courts o f f irst i nstance shall be observed b efore the Court of A ppeal.
Article 2 15 — Before t he C ourt of Appeal, c ourt o ffences will b e j udged w ithout a ppeal. F or crimes
committed to the h earing o f the Court of Appeal, the case will b e j udged immediately and without
to b e distraught.
The Court o f Appeal will hear the w itnesses, the o ffender a nd the defender h e h as chosen or w ho h as been appointed t o him.
appointed b y t he p resident and after h aving n oted the facts or h eard t he public p rosecutor, a ll p ublicly, it will a pply the
sentence b y a j udgment which w ill be j ustified.
Article 2 16 — In the e vent t hat it is pleaded before t he appeal c ourt b y m emorial, the c ase is
called t o t he h earing s et a nd it i s proceeded in accordance with the r equirements of A rticles 1 9 a nd
following.
BOOK I II
Extraordinary ways to attack judgments.
TITLE I
From the t hird opposition.
Article 2 17 — A p arty m ay f ile a third-party o bjection t o a judgment which prejudices its r ights, and when
from w hich n either s he nor t hose s he represents h ave been called.
Article 2 18 — The third-party o pposition b rought by principal a ction w ill b e b rought before the c ourt w hich rendered the
contested j udgment.


Any third-party i ncidental o pposition to a d ispute brought b efore a c ourt shall b e filed by a pplication to t hat
court, if i t is e qual t o or higher t han the c ourt which rendered t he j udgment.
Article 219 — If i t i s not e qual or higher, t he t hird-party incidental o pposition will b e brought, by principal
action, to the c ourt w hich r endered the j udgment.
Article 220 — The c ourt before w hich t he c ontested j udgment has been p roduced m ay, d epending on the
circumstances, override or s tay the j udgment.
Article 221 — Judgments w hich h ave become final and binding, ordering t he a bandonment o f p ossession o f
an i nheritance, shall be executed against the c ondemned p arties, n otwithstanding t hird-party opposition, and
without prejudice thereto.
In other cases, t he j udges may, depending o n the c ircumstances, s uspend the e xecution o f t he j udgment.
Article 222 — The p arty whose third-party opposition is rejected will b e sentenced to a f ine which may n ot
be l ess t han 5 00 f rancs n or e xceed 5,000 francs w ithout p rejudice t o t he p arty's d amages, i f a pplicable.
TITLE I I
Of t he civil request.
Article 223 — Contradictory judgments r endered as a l ast resort by justices o f t he p eace w ith e xtended
jurisdiction, courts o f first instance a nd a ppeal, a nd judgments b y default r endered a s a l ast resort, and which
are no l onger s ubject to opposition, m ay be w ithdrawn, a t t he r equest o f t hose who w ere p arties or d uly
summoned, f or t he f ollowing reasons:
:
1° I f t here was p ersonal fraud;
2° I f t he f orms p rescribed under p enalty of n ullity h ave b een v iolated, either b efore o r during the
judgments, provided that the n ullity has not b een c overed by the p arties;
3° I f i t w as p ronounced o n things not r equested;
4° I f m ore w as awarded t han was a sked f or;
5° I f i t h as been o mitted to rule o n o ne of t he h eads o f c laim;
6° I f t here is a c onflict of judgments in t he l ast instance, b etween t he s ame parties and on the s ame
grounds, in t he s ame c ourts o r tribunals;
7° If, in the s ame judgment, there are contrary p rovisions;
8° I f, in cases w here t he l aw requires c ommunication to t he p ublic p rosecutor, this communication
has n ot t aken p lace, a nd the j udgment h as been r endered against the p erson for w hom it w as ordered;
9° I f t he j udgment was b ased o n documents recognized o r declared f alse s ince the j udgment;
10° If, since t he j udgment, decisive documents have b een r ecovered w hich had been r etained by the
party.
Article 224 — The S tate, t he T erritory, the m unicipalities, p ublic e stablishments and minors a re still entitled
to appeal, i f t hey have not b een defended o r if t hey have b een v alidly defended.


Article 225 — I f there has been an o pening o nly against o ne h ead of t he judgment, it alone w ill be retracted,
unless t he o thers are d ependent on i t.
Article 226 — T he c ivil application s hall b e m ade b y summons s erved with a s ummons t o a ppear b efore
the c ompetent c ourt w ithin two m onths w ith r espect to a dults, from the date of s ervice o f t he contested
judgment i n person o r at home.
Article 227 — T he t wo-month period w ill o nly run a gainst m inors from the day t he judgment i s s erved on
them, whether in person o r a t their domicile, s ince t hey came o f a ge.
Article 228 — W hen t he applicant is absent from the territory f or s ervice r easons, h e will have, i n a ddition
to the o rdinary p eriod of t wo m onths from t he service o f t he judgment, a p eriod of t wo months.
The same w ill apply to s eafarers a bsent due t o n avigation.
Article 229 — T hose w ho r eside o utside Cameroon w ill have, i n a ddition t o t he period o f t wo months from
the n otification of t he judgment, t he period o f a djournments regulated by Article 1 5 above.
Article 230 — I f the condemned p arty dies w ithin the time l imits s et above for b ringing an action, the
remainder of t he proceedings w ill o nly begin, against t he estate, within the time limits a nd i n t he manner
prescribed by t he above a rticle.
Article 2 31 — When the opening of c ivil p roceedings is f orgery, fraud or t he discovery of n ew evidence, t he time l imits w ill
only run from the day o n which e ither t he forgery or f raud has been recognized o r t he e vidence discovered; provided t hat, in
these l ast two cases, there is written p roof of the d ay and n ot o therwise.
Article 232 — I f there is a c onflict of j udgment, the time l imit w ill r un f rom the day o f s ervice o f t he last
judgment.
Article 233 — T he c ivil application s hall b e b rought b efore t he same c ourt w here the judgment was
rendered; i t may b e d ecided there b y t he same j udges.
Article 234 — I f a p arty wishes to c hallenge by civil action a j udgment produced i n a c ase p ending i n a
court other than that w hich r endered i t, i t shall a ppeal to t he court w hich r endered the c ontested j udgment;
and the c ourt seized o f t he c ase i n which i t is p roduced m ay, d epending o n the circumstances, o verrule o r
stay the j udgment.
Article 235 — I f the application i s filed incidentally before a c ourt c ompetent t o h ear i t, i t will b e filed by
simple conclusion, but i f it is incidental to a d ispute b rought b efore a c ourt other t han t hat which r endered
the j udgment, i t will be f iled by s ummons before t he judges who r endered the judgment.
Article 236 — T he c ivil application o f a ny party o ther t han t hat which s tipulates t he interests o f t he State
or the T erritory s hall n ot b e r eceived i f, before this a pplication has b een presented, a s um of 3 ,000 francs
has n ot been d eposited in the registry a s a f ine a nd 5 ,000 francs f or the damages o f t he party, without
prejudice t o f urther d amages, if applicable; t he deposit shall b e half, if the judgment is b y default or by
foreclosure, and a q uarter i n the case o f j udgments given b y the courts of f irst instance.
Article 237 — T he c lerk's r eceipt will b e s erved at t he head of t he request, as well a s a c onsultation with
three l awyers practicing for a t least f ive years before a c ourt o r tribunal o f F rance o r the French U nion,
including a t least o ne b efore one o f t he courts o f C ameroon.
The consultation will contain a s tatement t hat t hey are of t he o pinion of t he civil petition, a nd i t will a lso
state the o penings, otherwise the p etition w ill n ot be received.


Article 2 38 — T he c ivil application s hall n ot p revent the e xecution o f the c ontested j udgment; n o defenses m ay b e
granted; the p erson w ho h as b een ordered t o abandon a n i nheritance shall not be a llowed to plead on t he c ivil
application unless he provides proof of t he execution o f the j udgment i n t he m ain p roceedings.
Article 2 39 — A ny civil a pplication s hall be communicated to the p ublic prosecutor.
Article 2 40 — N o m eans other than t he civil application o penings set out i n the c onsultation will b e d iscussed at
the h earing o r i n writing.
Article 2 41 — T he j udgment dismissing the civil a pplication shall order the a pplicant t o pay the f ine and damages
set above, without prejudice to f urther d amages, if applicable.
Article 2 42 — I f t he civil a pplication i s admitted, t he j udgment s hall be w ithdrawn, and the p arties s hall be r eleased
in the s ame s tate in which t hey w ere b efore this judgment; t he s ums deposited w ill b e r eturned, a nd the
objects o f t he convictions which would h ave b een c ollected u nder the r evoked judgment w ill b e r eturned.
When t he c ivil a pplication h as b een ratified f or r easons of conflict of judgments, t he j udgment w hich ratifies t he
civil a pplication w ill o rder t hat the first judgment b e e xecuted a ccording t o its f orm a nd content.
Article 2 43 — T he s ubstance of t he dispute o n which the r etracted j udgment w as rendered w ill b e b rought t o the
same court t hat ruled o n the civil a pplication.
Article 2 44 — N o p arty may a ppeal in a c ivil a ction, either a gainst t he j udgment w hich dismissed it, o r against t he
judgment r endered on t he rescission, under penalty o f nullity and damages, even against t he d efense lawyer who,
having acted o n t he first application, w ould act o n the s econd.
Article 2 45 — T he c ontradiction o f j udgments r endered i n final i nstance b etween the s ame parties a nd on
the s ame means in different courts g ives rise t o cassation; and the i nstance i s f ormed a nd
judged in accordance with t he laws which are s pecific t o the C ourt o f Cassation.
TITLE I II
From the taking t o t ask.
Article 2 46 — J udges m ay b e taken t o t ask in the f ollowing cases:
1° I f t here is fraud, deceit, bribery o r serious p rofessional misconduct w hich one would claim to have been
committed, either during the investigation o r during j udgments;
2° I f t he taking i nto account is expressly p ronounced b y l aw;
3° I f t he law d eclares t he judges r esponsible, under penalty o f damages;
4° I f t here is a d enial of j ustice.
The Territory i s civilly l iable for a ny d amages a warded against t he m agistrates as a result o f these acts, except f or
its r ecourse against the latter.
Article 2 47 — T here is a denial o f j ustice when judges refuse to respond to requests or neglect t o
judge c ases i n r eadiness a nd i n turn t o b e judged.
Article 2 48 — T he d enial of j ustice will be established by t wo requisitions made to the j udge i n the p erson of
clerks and served a t least e very eight d ays; a ny b ailiff o r enforcement agent r equired w ill b e
required to m ake t hese requisitions, under penalty o f prohibition.
Article 2 49 — A fter t he two r equisitions, the j udge m ay b e t aken to task.


Article 2 50 — T he taking t o task o f justices o f t he p eace with extended or ordinary jurisdiction a gainst
courts o f first i nstance or a gainst a ny o f their m embers, a nd the t aking t o t ask of a
advisor to the C ourt o f Appeal o r t he c riminal c ourt, will be brought b efore t he C ourt o f A ppeal o f Cameroon.
Any a ction t aken a gainst t he c riminal c ourt, the Court o f A ppeal o r one of its chambers w ill be brought before t he Court
of Cassation.
Article 2 51 - However, no m agistrate m ay b e taken to t ask without p rior a uthorization f rom the f irst p resident w ho will
decide a fter having o btained the a dvice o f the a ttorney g eneral.
In the event of a refusal, which w ill b e justified, t he c omplaining p arty may refer the m atter to the C ourt o f C assation in
accordance w ith t he p rovisions of A rticle 4 5 of t he l aw of J uly 23, 1947.
Article 2 52 — A r equest f rom t he p arty o r i ts proxy holder will be submitted for t his purpose.
authentic a nd special, which power o f a ttorney will be attached t o the r equest; a s well a s t he d ocuments
supporting d ocuments, if any, u nder penalty o f nullity.
Article 2 35 — N o i nsulting t erm may b e used a gainst t he j udges, u nder penalty o f a fine against t he party a s appropriate.
Article 2 54 — I f t he a pplication i s rejected, t he a pplicant s hall b e ordered t o pay d amages t o t he p arties, if applicable.
Article 2 55 — I f t he a pplication i s admitted, it w ill be served within t hree d ays o n the j udge i n q uestion, who will be
required t o provide his defenses w ithin eight days.
He w ill r efrain from k nowing t he d ispute; he will even r efrain, until t he f inal j udgment o f the t aking t o c ourt, from all the
causes that the p arty, o r h is relatives i n d irect line o r his s pouse m ay have i n h is c ourt, under p enalty o f nullity o f t he
judgments.
Article 2 56 — T he taking o f part will b e brought to t he h earing upon simple request and will be judged b y another
room t han the o ne that a dmitted it.
Article 2 57 — I f t he a pplicant is dismissed, he will b e ordered t o pay d amages t o t he p arties i f necessary.
TITLE IV
Appeals i n c assation.
Article 2 58 - (Art. 5 5 o f t he d ecree of 27 N ovember 1 947).- Judgments r endered i n a ny m atter by the C ourt of A ppeal,
except w here it r ules a s a Court of A nnulment - a nd final j udgments of t he C ourts of First I nstance a nd justices o f the
peace with extended jurisdiction - m ay b e referred to t he C ourt o f Cassation i n a ccordance w ith the p rovisions of
metropolitan l egislation.
[See O. 5 9-86 o f 17-12-59 o n t he j udicial organization ( JOC, 5 9, p. 1 801)]
BOOK I V
On t he execution o f judgments.
TITLE I
Deposits and receipt of g uarantees.


Article 2 59 — T he judgment o rdering the p rovision of s ecurity shall set t he time l imit w ithin w hich it s hall b e
presented, and the t ime l imit w ithin w hich i t shall b e accepted or contested.
Article 2 60 — T he security shall be presented by writ served on t he party, with a copy of t he deposit document
which will b e made at t he r egistry and t itles w hich establish t he solvency o f t he surety, e xcept i n the case
where t he l aw d oes not r equire t hat the s olvency b e established by titles.
Article 2 61 — T he party m ay t ake communication of t he titles f rom the registry; i f i t a ccepts the surety,
she will d eclare it by a single act; in t his case, or if t he party d oes n ot c ontest within t he time l imit, t he surety
will m ake i ts submission to t he r egistry, which will b e enforceable, without judgment.
Article 2 62 — I f the p arty contests t he deposit within t he time l imit s et b y the judgment, the hearing w ill c ontinue
by a s imple a ct o f t he c ourt.
The bail r eceipts w ill b e judged urgently. The j udgment w ill b e executed n otwithstanding the appeal.
Article 2 63 — I f the s urety is a dmitted, it will make i ts submission i n accordance with Article 2 60 above.
TITLE II
On the liquidation o f d amages.
Article 2 64 — W hen the j udgment o r order has n ot f ixed the damages, t he declaration i n
will b e s erved o n the d efendant or h is a gent; and documents w ill b e communicated by means o f the
graft.
Article 2 65 — T he defendant shall be required w ithin t he time l imit s et by Article 9 5 t o deliver the said documents a nd,
eight days after t he e xpiry of t he s aid d eadlines, t o make o ffers t o t he applicant o f t he sum t hat h e will a dvise
for d amages; otherwise t he c ase will be brought o n s imple s ubmissions at the hearing, a nd i t
will b e o rdered to p ay the a mount o f t he d eclaration, i f i t i s f ound t o b e correct a nd properly v erified.
Article 2 66 — I f the c ontested o ffers a re deemed s ufficient, t he applicant w ill b e ordered t o pay t he costs from
the date o f t he o ffers.
TITLE III
From the liquidation of f ruits.
Article 2 67 — A nyone who is o rdered to r eturn fruits will a ccount f or t hem i n the following m anner; and the
same procedure will apply to o ther a ccounts r endered i n court.
TITLE IV
Accountabilities.
Article 2 68 — A ccountants a ppointed by the courts w ill b e prosecuted before t he judges w ho have
clerks; guardians before t he j udges of t he p lace where t he guardianship w as referred; a ll o ther a ccountants,
before the judges of t heir d omicile.
Article 2 69 — I n t he e vent of a n appeal against a judgment w hich has d ismissed a request f or a n accounting,
the reversing j udgment will refer, for the r endering a nd judgment o f t he account, t o t he court w here the
application was m ade, o r any other c ourt o f first instance that t he judgment i ndicates.
If t he account h as been r endered a nd judged in first i nstance, the execution of the reversal judgment w ill b elong
to t he court w hich r endered it or t o another court w hich it w ill h ave indicated b y the same j udgment.


Article 2 70 — Parties who have the same interest may appoint a s ingle defense a ttorney;
If there is n o a greement on t he choice, the o ldest w ill occupy; n evertheless, each o f the p arties may
constitute one, b ut the costs i ncurred by this particular c onstitution w ill be borne by him.
Article 2 71 — Any j udgment ordering a n account to be rendered s hall s et t he t ime limit w ithin which t he
account shall b e rendered a nd s hall appoint a j udge.
Article 2 72 — If t he preamble t o t he account, i ncluding t he m ention of the a ct o r j udgment w hich
will h ave c ommitted t he rendering a nd o f t he j udgment w hich w ill have o rdered the a ccount, exceeds s ix
roles, the excess will n ot pass i nto tax.
Article 2 73 — The p arty m aking the request w ill only use travel e xpenses for common e xpenses, i f a pplicable,
the d uties of t he defense l awyer w ho will have p ut in o rder the a ccount d ocuments, t he m ain d ocuments a nd c opies,
the c osts o f p resentation and a ffirmation.
Article 2 74 — The a ccount will c ontain a ctual receipts and expenditures; it will end with a s ummary of the
balance o f said receipts and e xpenditures, unless a separate c hapter is m ade for items to be recovered.
Article 2 75 — The p ayer shall present a nd affirm his a ccount i n p erson o r b y special agent,
within t he t ime l imit s et a nd o n the day indicated b y the e xamining magistrate, the p ersons p resent, or c alled to
person o r d omicile, if t hey d o not h ave defense lawyers and by act o f the c ourt i f t hey have a ppointed them.
After t he deadline, the person rendering t he g oods w ill be forced t o do s o by seizure and sale, u p to a s um
which t he court will a rbitrate.
Article 2 76 — The a ccount presented and a ffirmed, i f the i ncome exceeds the e xpenditure, the l ender may
request the executive receiver o f t his e xcess, w ithout approval o f the a ccount.
Article 2 77 — After the presentation a nd a ffirmation, the a ccount w ill be served on the b eneficiary or h is
defense attorney: the supporting d ocuments will be listed and initialed b y the b eneficiary or b y his d efense
attorney if h e has one; if they a re communicated on receipt, they w ill be restored within the t ime limit
which w ill b e set b y the bankruptcy j udge.
If the p arties have a ppointed different defense lawyers, the c opy a nd communication a bove
will be g iven to t he senior defense attorney o nly if t hey have t he s ame interest, and to each
defense lawyer, i f t hey h ave different i nterests.
If there are i ntervening c reditors, they w ill a ll have o nly one communication together, b oth of t he a ccount and of t he
supporting d ocuments, through the hands o f the m ost senior o f t he d efense l awyers they have appointed.
Article 2 78 — Receipts from s uppliers, workers, p ension masters, a nd others o f the s ame nature, p roduced
as supporting documents for the account, a re e xempt from registration.
Article 2 79 — On t he day and a t t he time i ndicated b y the c ommissioner, t he p arties s hall a ppear b efore him
to provide debates, s upport a nd r esponses o n its minutes; if t he p arties d o n ot appear
no, t he c ase w ill b e brought to t he hearing on a s imple a ct.
Article 2 80 — If t he parties d o not a gree, the c ommissioner shall order t hat he shall do s o
report to t he hearing, on t he day he indicates; t hey w ill be required to be there, without any
summons.
Article 2 81 — The j udgment w hich will be issued on the a ccount p roceedings will contain t he c alculation o f
the i ncome a nd e xpenditure, and w ill f ix the precise b alance, i f there i s o ne.


Article 2 82 — No account shall be r evised, e xcept w here the p arties, i f there are e rrors, omissions, forgeries
or duplications, m ay s ubmit t heir r equests before t he s ame judges.
Article 2 83 — If t he beneficiary is i n default, the c ommissioner will make his r eport o n t he d ay i ndicated b y him:
items will b e allocated, i f t hey a re j ustified; the r eturnee, i f he i s i n balance, w ill k eep t he f unds, without
interest, and i f i t i s n ot a guardianship a ccount, the a ccountant w ill give s ecurity, if he d oes not prefer t o
deposit.
TITLE V
Liquidation o f c osts and e xpenses.
Article 2 84 — The liquidation of costs a nd e xpenses will b e made by t he j udgment which a wards t hem.
TITLE VI
General r ules o n t he execution o f j udgments and a cts.
Article 2 85 — No judgment o r act m ay b e e nforced unless i t bears the s ame title
that the l aws a nd are not terminated b y the s ame mandate t o the o fficers of justice, a s is said i n
Article 61.
Article 2 86 — Judgments r endered by foreign courts a nd d ocuments r eceived b y o fficers shall n ot
will b e e nforceable in C ameroon only i f t hey h ave b een declared enforceable there by t he
French court of t he territory, w ithout p rejudice t o any c ontrary provisions which m ay e xist i n the
diplomatic c onventions or guardianship a greements.
Article 2 87 — Judgments r endered and acts passed i n C ameroon, France, A lgeria,
Morocco, Tunisia, o verseas departments a nd t erritories u nder t he M inistry o f
France overseas will be e nforceable throughout the t erritory, even i f the e nforcement t akes place outside the
jurisdiction o f t he court b y w hich the judgments w ere r endered or of the c ountry in which t he a cts w ere
past.
Judgments r endered a nd acts passed i n the a ssociated S tates w ill b e enforceable under t he c onditions set
out i n t he c onventions entered i nto w ith t hese States.
Article 2 88 — Judgments w hich pronounce a r elease, a c ancellation of mortgage r egistration, a p ayment o r
something else t o b e done by a third party or at their expense, will n ot be e nforceable by third parties o r
against them, e ven a fter the t ime limits f or o pposition o r appeal, e xcept on t he
certificate o f t he defense attorney, t he prosecuting p arty or that party itself, containing the
date o f s ervice o f t he judgment m ade at t he d omicile of the c ondemned p arty, and o n t he c ertificate o f
clerk n oting that there is n o objection a gainst the
judgment n either o pposition n or a ppeal.
Article 2 89 — Upon certification t hat there is no o pposition o r appeal, t he c onservatories, and a ll others,
shall be required to s atisfy the j udgment.
Article 2 90 — Subject to the s pecial provisions relating t o registered r eal e state, no s eizure o f movable or
immovable property s hall be m ade except by v irtue of a n enforceable title, and f or
liquid a nd certain t hings; if t he debt d ue is n ot a s um of money, i t will b e suspended, after
the s eizure, to a ll s ubsequent p roceedings, until the a ssessment h as b een made.
Article 2 91 — Disputes raised r egarding t he e nforcement o f judgments of commercial courts s hall b e
brought b efore the court o f first instance of the p lace where enforcement w ill c ontinue.


Article 2 92 — If t he difficulties encountered in t he e xecution o f judgments o r a cts r equire speed, t he l ocal c ourt
will rule p rovisionally and r efer t he m atter to t he e nforcement c ourt.
Article 2 93 — The bailiff or e nforcement o fficer i nsulted in the exercise o f h is f unctions will draw u p a report o f r ebellion;
and t he procedure will b e f ollowed in accordance w ith t he rules established by t he Code o f C riminal Procedure.
Article 2 94 — The d elivery of the document or j udgment to the b ailiff o r e nforcement o fficer s hall b e d eemed to be p ower
for a ll executions other t han the s eizure of real e state for w hich s pecial power will b e r equired.
TITLE V II
Attachments o r oppositions.
Article 2 95 — With t he permission o f the j udge of the d omicile of the d ebtor or t he t hird p arty seized, a ny creditor
may, by v irtue of an enforceable o r p rivate title, o r e ven without a title, s eize a nd arrest i n the h ands of a third p arty t he
sums and e ffects belonging to his d ebtor, or oppose t heir d elivery.
Article 2 96 — When there is a title, the o rder shall c ontain a statement t hereof a nd mention o f the a mount
for w hich garnishment is a uthorized. If t he d ebt i s n ot l iquid, the p rovisional a ssessment w ill b e m ade by t he j udge.
The request w ill contain a n election of domicile in t he p lace where the t hird p arty seized resides i f the s eizing party
does n ot r eside t here.
Article 2 97 — If t he attachment i s a uthorized under an e nforceable title, t he j udge's order is
prohibiting the third p arty s eized from paying the d ebtor and the l atter from r ecovering his debt or d isposing o f it.
The third p arty s eized is f urther required b y the o rder to make the d eclaration provided f or i n Article 310 below.
The order i s s erved o n the t hird p arty a nd t he g arnishee w ithin e ight d ays. The third party may m ake his
declaration to the bailiff or e nforcement officer, i mmediately, or b y r egistered letter with a cknowledgment of receipt
addressed t o the seizing party w ithin t wo weeks o f notification to him.
Within the s ame p eriod, the person seized may request the l ifting o f the g arnishment from t he c ourt of his domicile a nd
notify t he garnishee of his o pposition. If t he g arnishee's declaration i s c ontested by t he g arnishee,
the latter m ay r efer the matter t o the court o f the d ebtor's d omicile, e xcept f or the t hird p arty seized, t o invoke the
provisions of Article 3 09 below.
Article 2 98 — The t ransfer of the d ebt to the b enefit of the s eizing c reditor, u p to the a mount o f the d ebt of the
seized c reditor t o him, t akes place at t he e nd o f the o pposition p eriod o pen t o the s eized creditor. T he third p arty s eized i s then released
validly i n t he hands o f the s eizing party o f the a mount o f the c auses of the s eizure a s s tated in
the order, i f t he person seized has not notified him of any o pposition. T he expiry o f the p eriod f or opposition o pen to t he
seized results f rom a c ertificate from the clerk endorsed by the j udge.
Article 2 99 — If t he seized person has summoned f or release, t he t ransfer o f debt takes place when the j udgment
validating t he seizure and r efusing the release w as notified to the t hird p arty seized and is n o l onger s ubject t o appeal,
unless provisional enforcement has b een ordered. When t here are s everal g arnishments, t he
distribution o f the prize as indicated b elow in a rticles 415 et s eq. ( Distribution b y
contribution).
Article 3 00 — When there is n o enforceable t itle, t he o rder i s l imited to authorizing t he s eizure. In t he
eight d ays of the seizure, n ot including the time l imits for d istance, t he s eizing party is r equired, under penalty o f nullity, t o
report the seizure to the s eized debtor and s ummon him for validity b efore t he c ourt of his domicile.
summons t he third p arty s eized for the s ame h earing for the d eclaration p rovided for i n A rticle 310 except w hen
this, a lready made w ithin t he t ime limit a nd a s s tated in article 2 97 above, is n ot c ontested.


The s eized debtor m ay s ummon t he s eizing p arty b efore the same c ourt to have the seizure lifted.
Article 3 01 — T he court decides o n t he v alidity, nullity o r release o f the seizure a s well a s o n t he
declaration that t he third party seized i s required t o make at the h earing if he has not m ade i t beforehand t o the b ailiff o r
the enforcement a gent d uring the seizure o r by registered letter with acknowledgment of r eceipt a ddressed t o t he s eizing
party.
Article 3 02 — T he third p arty s eized who h as n ot made h is declaration b y any of the three m eans open t o him
or who h as made a f alse s tatement may b e declared t he pure and s imple d ebtor of the causes o f the seizure.
Article 3 03 — T he transfer of debt t o the b enefit o f the seizing party t akes p lace u nder t he conditions p rovided for in
Article 2 99.
Article 3 04 — T he seizure-arrest formed in t he h ands of receivers, depositaries o r administrators o f funds o r public f unds,
in this c apacity, w ill not be valid, if the w rit is not m ade t o anyone
appointed t o r eceive it, and if it is not endorsed b y her on t he original o r, i n the event o f refusal, by t he Public P rosecutor
of t he Republic.
Article 3 05 — T he seizure in t he h ands o f p ersons not r esiding in C ameroon m ay n ot b e m ade at t he domicile of the public
prosecutors; it must b e served p ersonally or o n
residence.
Article 3 06 — T he bailiff o r e nforcement officer who has served t he garnishment o rder shall be l iable, if a pplicable:
required, to p rovide p roof of the e xecution of the s eizing authority a t the time when the power t o seize was g iven, failing
which the parties will b e prohibited and liable for damages.
Article 3 07 — I n any e vent a nd whatever t he s tate o f the case, the seized p arty m ay
apply f or i nterim relief i n order to obtain authorization to collect f rom t he garnishee, notwithstanding opposition,
condition of p aying into the C aisse des d épôts et consignations, or into t he hands o f a third p arty a ppointed to this
effect, sufficient s um arbitrated by the i nterim r elief j udge, t o respond t o any causes o f
garnishment in the e vent t hat the p erson s eized recognizes o r is j udged t o be a debtor.
The d eposit thus ordered will b e specially allocated to the hands o f the third p arty h older to guarantee t he
claims f or security f or which s eizure h as b een carried o ut a nd e xclusive p rivilege over any other will be granted to them
on said d eposit.
From t he execution of t he i nterim o rder, the t hird party s eized w ill b e d ischarged a nd t he effects of the seizure transferred
to t he third party h older.
Article 3 08 — T he public o fficials referred to in A rticle 304 w ill not m ake a declaration, but w ill i ssue a certificate s tating
whether i t is due to t he s eized party a nd stating the amount, if i t i s l iquid.
Article 3 09 — T he third p arty s eized, s ummoned to make a declaration b efore the court of the domicile of the seized
person, m ay, i f his d eclaration i s contested, request t hat it b e referred to his judge.
Article 3 10 — T he declaration s hall state t he c auses a nd t he amount of the debt; the payments o n a ccount,
if a ny h ave been made; the a ct or c auses o f release, i f t he seized t hird p arty i s n o l onger a debtor; a nd i n
in all cases t he s eizures or o ppositions f ormed in his h ands.
Supporting documents f or t he d eclaration will be attached t o it.
Article 3 11 — N ew seizures made i n the h ands o f the third p arty s eized s hall be immediately brought to the
knowledge of t he f irst seizing p arty b y registered l etter w ith acknowledgment of receipt in
mentioning t he names a nd addresses of t he seizing p arties and t he r easons for seizure.


Article 3 12 — I f t he declaration i s n ot contested, n o proceedings w ill b e taken, either b y the t hird p arty seized or a gainst him.
Article 3 13 — I f t he attachment is m ade o n personal effects, t he t hird p arty seized shall be required t o a ttach t o h is
declaration a d etailed statement o f s aid effects.
Article 3 14 — S alaries a nd pensions owed b y t he S tate may o nly b e seized for the f ollowing portion:
- 10% on the portion between 10,000 francs of l ocal currency, p er m onth;
- 20% on the portion between 10,000 and 50,000 f rancs of l ocal c urrency, p er m onth;
- 50% on the portion between 50,000 and 80,000 f rancs of l ocal c urrency, p er m onth;
- 100% on the portion a bove 80,000 francs i n l ocal currency per m onth.
Article 3 15 — The f ollowing s hall b e e xempt from s eizure:
1° Things d eclared unseizable by l aw;
2° F ood p rovisions a warded b y c ourt o rder;
3° T he sums and available objects d eclared unseizable by the t estator or d onor;
4° Amounts and pensions for maintenance even if the w ill o r deed o f g ift d oes not d eclare them unseizable.
Article 3 16 — A limony m ay only be s eized f or m aintenance: the o bjects m entioned in n umbers 3 and 4 of t he p receding
article may be s eized b y c reditors subsequent t o the d eed o f d onation o r the o pening of a legacy; a nd this, b y virtue o f t he
permission of t he judge a nd for t he portion t hat h e will d etermine.
TITLE VIII
On precautionary seizure.
Article 3 17 — I n c ommercial matters, i n c ases requiring s peed, t he P resident o f t he C ourt or the J ustice o f t he P eace with
extended jurisdiction may a llow t he seizure of p ersonal e ffects. He may
depending o n the requirements o f t he cases, subject a pplicants to p roviding security o r p roviding proof of s olvency
sufficient. I ts o rders w ill b e e nforceable notwithstanding o pposition or appeal.
TITLE IX
Seizures.
Article 3 18 — A ny s eizure for e xecution s hall be preceded by an order to t he p erson o r
domicile of the d ebtor, made a t least one d ay before the seizure, and containing notification of the title, if it h as not a lready
been n otified.
However, when t here is a r isk t hat the p erson s eized w ill t ake a dvantage o f the s aid period t o conceal his m ost valuable f urniture,
valuable, t he creditor can have t he seizure c arried out w ithout prior order, b ut w ith the
permission of t he Judge, which w ill b e j ustified a nd subject t o r eferral.


Article 3 19 — The order will c ontain an election of domicile u ntil t he e nd of the p rosecution, in
the locality where t he court o f the place of s eizure sits, i f t he c reditor d oes not r eside there, and the d ebtor may
make a ll n otifications to this elected d omicile, e ven of real offers o r a ppeals.
Article 3 20 — (D. of 1 3 January 1923).- T he bailiff o r e nforcement o fficer m ay b e assisted by o ne or t wo
adult witnesses, who are n ot relatives o r a llies o f the p arties o r o f the b ailiff o r e nforcement o fficer, up to
and i ncluding t he second c ousin, nor their s ervants.
In this c ase, he w ill s tate their n ames, p rofessions a nd addresses in the r eport; t he w itnesses w ill s ign
the original c opy. The prosecuting p arty m ay n ot b e p resent a t the s eizure.
Article 3 21 — The formalities of the writs w ill b e observed in the r eports of seizure and execution; t hey
will contain a n i terative command if t he seizure is made a t the s eized p arty's r esidence.
Article 3 22 — If t he doors a re closed, a nd i f opening is refused, the b ailiff o r a gent
The e nforcement officer may e stablish a g uard a t the g ates t o prevent t he e ntertainment; he w ill w ithdraw
immediately without summons, before the Judge or, failing that, b efore t he j udicial police officer i n
presence o f w hich the opening o f doors, e ven t hose o f closing f urniture, will b e m ade, as a nd when
extent o f t he seizure. T he officer who goes there will n ot d raw up a r eport; but h e will s ign
that o f t he b ailiff o r enforcement o fficer, who m ay o nly d raw up one and the s ame
minutes.
Article 3 23 — The report shall contain the detailed description of the s eized o bjects: if t here are g oods,
they s hall b e w eighed, m easured or g auged, depending o n their n ature.
Article 3 24 — Silverware s hall be s pecified b y pieces a nd hallmarks, a nd it s hall be w eighed.
Article 3 25 — If t here a re c ash funds, the number a nd quality o f the f unds will b e mentioned.
cash: the b ailiff o r e nforcement officer w ill d eposit t hem at the p lace e stablished for deposits; unless
that t he seizing p arty and the seized party, together with t he o pponents, if a ny, a gree o n a nother
depositary.
Article 3 26 — If t he person s eized is absent and there is a r efusal t o open any r oom or p iece o f furniture,
the bailiff or enforcement officer will r equest that it b e opened, and if a ny p apers a re f ound, h e will r equest
that t he officer called for the opening a ffix s eals.
Article 3 27 — The f ollowing may not be seized:
1° Objects that the law d eclares to be immovable by d estination;
2° The n ecessary sleeping a rrangements for t he seized p ersons, those o f their c hildren living w ith them; t he clothes of w hich
the s eized a re clothed and covered; the e ffects belonging to the w oman when s he i s not a j oint
owner;
3° Books relating to the profession o f the p erson seized, up t o the s um o f 20,000 f rancs;
4° M achines and instruments u sed f or the p ractical t eaching o r e xercise o f sciences a nd arts, u p
to the same amount and at t he discretion of the s eized p erson;
5° Military equipment, according t o order a nd rank;
6° The tools of craftsmen necessary f or their p ersonal o ccupations;
7° F lour and s mall f oodstuffs necessary f or t he c onsumption of t he p erson seized a nd the f amily f or o ne month,
as w ell as u tensils e ssential for t he p reparation o f f ood and meals;


8° F inally, o ne cow, o r three sheep, or t wo goats, a t the d iscretion o f the p erson seized, with the s traw, f odder
and grain necessary for t he bedding a nd f ood o f the s aid animals f or o ne m onth.
Article 3 28 — T he s aid o bjects m ay n ot be s eized f or a ny d ebt, e ven t hat o f t he S tate or the T erritory, e xcept
for maintenance provided to t he seized p arty, or sums due to t he m anufacturers or sellers of t he s aid o bjects,
or to t he person w ho has b een lent to buy, manufacture or repair them, f or
rents and h arvests o f the lands in the cultivation o f w hich they are e mployed, r ents of f actories,
mills, p resses and f actories o n w hich t hey d epend and rents of t he p remises u sed for t he p ersonal r esidence o f the
debtor.
The o bjects specified under No. 2 of the previous article m ay n ot be seized f or a ny d ebt.
Article 3 29 — I n the event of s eizure of animals a nd utensils used in the e xploitation of l and, the J udge m ay, a t
the request of the seizing p arty, t he owner a nd the s eized p arty having b een heard or summoned, appoint a
manager f or t he e xploitation.
Article 3 30 — T he m inutes s hall c ontain an indication o f t he d ay o f t he s ale.
Article 3 31 — I f t he seized p arty o ffers a solvent g uardian w ho v oluntarily a nd immediately t akes c harge, i t will
be established w ith t he bailiff or t he enforcement agent.
Article 3 32 — I f t he seized p erson does not present a s olvent guardian of t he r equired q uality, one will b e
established by the bailiff or t he enforcement agent.
Article 3 33 — T he f ollowing may n ot b e appointed guardians: the s eizing party, his spouse, his p arents a nd
relatives up to and i ncluding the degree of f irst c ousin, and his s ervants; but the s eized p arty, his
spouse, p arents, relatives i n-law and domestic s ervants m ay b e established a s guardians w ith their consent and t hat of the
seizing party.
Article 3 34 — T he r eport will b e made w ithout m oving; it will b e signed by the g uardian in the o riginal a nd the
copy; i f he cannot sign, t his w ill b e mentioned, and he will b e left w ith a c opy of t he r eport.
Article 3 35 — T hose w ho, by means of acts o f v iolence, p revent t he e stablishment of t he g uardian, o r who
remove and d ivert s eized e ffects, w ill b e prosecuted i n accordance with t he c ode of p rocedure
criminal.
Article 3 36 — I f t he seizure i s made at the party's h ome, a c opy of t he r eport w ill b e left w ith h im immediately,
signed by the persons who s igned the original. If the p arty is a bsent, a c opy will b e given to t he m ayor or
deputy mayor, o r t o the m agistrate, who, in t he e vent of r efusal of d oors, w ill h ave h ad the d oors o pened, and
who w ill endorse t he original.
Article 3 37 — I f t he seizure i s made outside t he h ome a nd in the a bsence o f t he p erson s eized, a c opy shall be
notified to him w ithin the time l imits provided for i n Articles 14 a nd 15 o f t his Code.
Otherwise, the custody f ees a nd t he time l imits for t he s ale will o nly run f rom t he d ay o f n otification.
Article 3 38 — T he k eeper may n ot u se t he seized t hings, rent t hem o r lend them, u nder p enalty of d eprivation
custody costs and d amages.
Article 3 39 — I f t he seized o bjects h ave p roduced any p rofits or income, he is r equired to c ount t hem.
Article 3 40 — H e m ay r equest his d ischarge, i f the s ale has n ot b een made on t he d ay i ndicated b y t he
minutes, without i t h aving b een prevented b y any o bstacle; a nd, in the e vent o f p revention, the d ischarge may
be requested two m onths after t he seizure, except for t he s eizing party to a ppoint another g uardian.


Article 3 41 — D ischarge will b e requested a gainst the s eizing p arty a nd t he s eized p arty, b y a summons i n
referred to t he J udge o f the p lace o f seizure, if it is granted, t he f ollowing will f irst b e c arried o ut:
inventory of seized e ffects, parties called.
Article 3 42 — I t w ill b e ignored, notwithstanding a ny c laims on t he p art of the s eized p arty o n w hich a summary judgment
will b e g iven.
Article 3 43 — A nyone w ho c laims t o be t he o wner o f the s eized o bjects, or p art of them, m ay oppose the s ale by w rit
served o n the k eeper, a nd n otified to the s eizing p arty a nd t he s eized p arty, containing
worded assignment and t he s tatement of proof of ownership, under penalty of nullity: i t will b e d ecided b y t he
court of the place of s eizure.
The claimant who l oses w ill b e o rdered, if n ecessary, to pay d amages t o the s eizing p arty.
Article 3 44 — T he creditors of the s eized p erson, f or w hatever r eason, even f or r ent, m ay not
form a n o pposition only o n t he s ale p rice: t heir oppositions w ill c ontain the r easons;
they w ill b e s erved on t he s eizing party a nd the bailiff o r e nforcement officer or o ther o fficer responsible for t he
sale, with election of domicile in the p lace w here t he s eizure is made, i f the o pponent i s n ot d omiciled there:
all u nder penalty of nullity of the o ppositions a nd d amages a gainst the b ailiff o r t he e nforcement agent, i f applicable.
Article 3 45 — T he opposing c reditor may n ot t ake any a ction, except against the p arty
seizure and to obtain conviction: n one will b e m ade a gainst him, except to discuss the c auses of
his opposition d uring the d istribution of money.
Article 3 46 — T he bailiff o r e nforcement o fficer w ho, a ppearing to seize, f inds a seizure
already made a nd an e stablished guardian, will n ot b e a ble to seize again; b ut h e w ill b e a ble to proceed t o the
inventory of furniture a nd effects on t he r eport, which the g uardian will b e r equired to present t o him, he
will s eize the o mitted e ffects, a nd will s ummon t he f irst seizing p arty t o sell everything within eight days; t he i nventory
report will b e v alid as an o pposition t o the s ale funds.
Article 3 47 — F ailure by t he s eizing party t o have t he s ale made w ithin the t ime limit set b elow, a ny o pponent h aving
enforceable title may, prior notice given t o the seizing a uthority and w ithout m aking any r equest
in s ubrogation, carry o ut a n i nventory o f the s eized objects, on t he c opy o f the s eizure report that t he k eeper will b e
required to present, and t hen the s ale.
Article 3 48 — T here shall b e a t least eight days between the n otification of the s eizure to the d ebtor and t he s ale.
Article 3 49 — I f t he s ale t akes p lace o n a day other than that i ndicated b y t he n otification, t he s eized p arty
will b e c alled, with a n i nterval of one day, i n addition to one d ay f or t hree m yriameters, due t o the d istance f rom t he
domicile of the s eized p erson and the p lace w here the e ffects will b e s old.
Article 3 50 — O pponents will n ot b e called.
Article 3 51 — T he inventory r eport which precedes t he s ale will n ot c ontain any s tatement o f the s eized a ssets but o nly
of t hose i n d eficit, if t here are a ny.
Article 3 52 — T he sale w ill b e m ade, either a t the next public m arket, on t he o rdinary day a nd t ime
markets, or o n a S unday, or a t the a uction r oom i f there i s one. However, it may
President of the C ourt t o allow t he e ffects t o be sold on a nother day o r o ther m ore a dvantageous place.
In a ny case, i t w ill b e announced o ne day b efore by a t least four p lacards, displayed, one
at t he p lace w here t he effects are, t he other a t t hat o f the subdivision, t he third at the market of the p lace, a nd if t here
are none a t t he neighboring m arket, t he
fourth at t he d oor of the c ourtroom and, i f the s ale takes place i n a place o ther t han the m arket
or the place where the e ffects are, a f ifth placard will b e a ffixed at the p lace w here t he s ale will t ake place. T he s ale will
also be a nnounced by n ewspapers, in the t owns where t here a re any.


Article 3 53 — The p lacards will i ndicate t he place, day and t ime o f the sale, a nd the nature of t he objects,
without particular details.
Article 3 54 — The a ffixing will b e r ecorded by w rit, t o which a copy of the placard w ill b e a ttached.
Article 3 55 — If it concerns b arges, launches, and other s ea-going vessels of the port of 10 tons and
below, ferries, galleys, boats and o ther river buildings, m ills a nd o ther b uildings
mobile, seated on boats or otherwise, they w ill b e a uctioned a t ports, stations o r
platforms w here they are l ocated: at l east f our placards will b e d isplayed, i n accordance w ith t he previous article,
and t hree publications w ill b e m ade, o n three c onsecutive days, at the place where t he said objects a re
located: t he f irst p ublication w ill not b e m ade u ntil at least e ight days a fter notification o f the seizure. I n
cities where newspapers are p rinted, these three p ublications w ill b e s upplemented b y t he insertion in the
newspaper of t he a nnouncement o f t he s aid sale, w hich a nnouncement w ill b e r epeated t hree times d uring
the month preceding t he s ale.
Article 3 56 — Silver tableware, r ings a nd jewels w ith a v alue of a t least 5 0,000 francs, shall n ot
may o nly be s old after p lacards have been a ffixed i n the above f orm, a nd three e xhibitions, either a t
market, or in t he p lace w here the s aid e ffects are, w ithout, however, i n any case t he said objects
may b e s old below t heir r eal m oney v alue, nor b elow the estimate w hich w ill h ave
was m ade by p eople o f art, i f it concerns r ings and j ewels.
In the cities where newspapers are p rinted, the three p ublications w ill b e s upplemented, as stated in the
preceding a rticle.
Article 3 57 — When the v alue o f t he s eized effects e xceeds t he amount o f t he causes of seizure a nd the
oppositions, only sufficient i tems w ill be sold t o provide the necessary sum f or the
payment of c laims and costs.
Article 3 58 — T he report w ill note t he p resence o r failure t o appear of the seized party.
Article 3 59 — The a uction will b e m ade t o the highest bidder, p aying c ash. In the absence of payment, the
instrument w ill be resold i mmediately at t he w inning b idder's w ild b id.
Article 3 60 — Auctioneers, bailiffs a nd enforcement a gents will b e p ersonally
responsible for t he p rice o f t he a uctions and will m ention, in their minutes, the names and
homes o f the s uccessful bidders: they may not r eceive from t hem any sum a bove t he bid,
bribery penalty.
TITLE X
From t he s eizure o f hanging f ruits by t he r oot or from t he seizure of t he brand.
Article 3 61 — The s eizure-brandon m ay only b e m ade w ithin the six weeks p receding
the ordinary t ime of t he r ipening of the f ruits; i t w ill b e p receded by a commandment w ith a day
'interval.
Article 3 62 — The s eizure r eport shall contain a n i ndication of each p iece, its c ontents and l ocation and a t
least t wo o f i ts i ns and outs, a nd the n ature o f t he fruits.
Article 3 63 — A guardian taken outside the persons included in t he exclusion provided for in A rticle 333 w ill
be e stablished; if he i s not present, the seizure w ill b e notified to h im; a c opy will a lso be left with t he mayor
of the m unicipality or failing t hat with t he head of the administrative unit o f t he situation and t he original w ill b e countersigned by them.
If t he property is located i n s everal administrative u nits (municipalities, subdivisions and r egions), a s ingle
guardian will be e stablished. The v isa w ill b e i ssued by o ne of t he heads o f t he said a dministrative units.


Article 3 64 — The sale w ill be announced b y n otices posted, at least eight d ays before the sale, at t he door of
the p erson s eized, a t t hat of the t own hall, and, if there i s n one, at the place where t he deeds o f s ale a re affixed.
the p ublic authority; at the m ain m arket o f the place, a nd, i f there i s n one, at the nearest market and a t the door
of the c ourtroom.
Article 3 65 — The notices w ill designate t he day, t ime a nd place o f sale, the names and r esidences o f the seized person
and of the s eizing party, the q uantity o f hectares a nd t he nature of each species o f fruit, the municipality o r
subdivision where t hey a re l ocated, w ithout f urther d esignation.
Article 366 — T he affixing o f the placards will b e n oted as stated under the h eading "seizures and e xecutions".
Article 3 67 — The sale w ill be made on a Sunday or m arket d ay.
Article 3 68 — It may be c arried out on the premises or i n the square o f t he municipality or s ubdivision where
the m ajority of the s eized objects a re l ocated.
The s ale m ay also be m ade at t he local m arket, and if there i s n one, at t he nearest market.
Article 3 69 — I n a ddition, t he formalities prescribed under "seizures a nd executions" w ill b e observed.
Article 3 70 — The sale p rice will be distributed as described under t he heading "distribution by c ontribution".
TITLE XI
On t he s eizure of annuities established on individuals.
Article 3 71 — The seizure of a n annuity constituted as perpetual o r life annuity, for a fixed capital s um, or for
the p rice o f the s ale o f a building, o r of t he t ransfer o f r eal estate funds, or a t any
other onerous o r free title, c annot t ake place w hen this a nnuity is s eizable except b y v irtue of a title
enforceable.
Article 3 72 — Although there i s a n enforceable title, t he rent will b e s eized in the hands o f the person w ho o wes it
following t he r ules prescribed u nder the heading "garnishments or o ppositions", for c ases w here t here i s n o
enforceable title under Articles 3 10 e t s eq. of this C ode.
The s eizure writ always c onstitutes s eizure o f the arrears due and t o fall due o f t he annuity until
final judgment.
Article 3 73 — The debtor shall, i n all c ases, b e s ummoned t o appear i n p erson o r at his or h er d omicile a nd
required to intervene i n t he p roceedings. Where t he declaration i s n either l ate n or c ontested, the costs o f the
debtor's intervention s hall b e b orne by the p arties ordered t o pay c osts.
Article 3 74 — The value o f t he claim w ill be assessed i n the form of an a nnuity based on t he value of the annuity
franc e stablished by the N ational Life I nsurance Fund f or v ictims of w ork accidents, a ccording to the rate in
force a t t he t ime o f the summons.
The c reditor w ill be substituted for h is d ebtor c reditor f or a n a nnuity corresponding t o the sums owed t o him,
within the l imit o f the a nnuity owed p er debtor.
Article 3 75 — The creditor m ay, h owever, r efuse t his s ubstitution a nd request t he court, at i ts
risks a nd p erils, t he sale b y public a uction of t he annuity. In this c ase, o n t he conclusions o f the
parties, t he c ourt w ill determine the c onditions under w hich t he sale w ill t ake p lace.


Article 3 76 — W hatever t he price o btained, the s eizing party's claim w ill be e xtinguished to t he e xtent that
it would have been, i f h e h ad agreed t o b e s ubstituted f or his creditor debtor, under the c onditions provided for in a rticle
374.
However, t he court may set a p rice b elow w hich b ids will n ot b e a ccepted. If it does n ot
If a higher price is n ot p resented, the c ase will be b rought before t he c ourt at t he d iligence
of the seizing party who w ill c onclude with t he s ubdivision p rovided for in s aid a rticle 3 74.
TITLE X II
Rights o f owners over the furniture, effects and f ruits of t heir tenants and f armers or o f the
attachment a nd s eizure o f foreign d ebtors.
Article 3 77 — O wners a nd principal tenants o f h ouses or r ural properties, whether there a re
lease, or there is n one, may, o ne day after order, and without p ermission o f the j udge, make
seizure, for r ents and l eases due, the effects and fruits b eing in t he s aid h ouses or
rural b uildings and o n land.
They can even h ave t he p roperty seized i mmediately, b y v irtue of t he p ermission t hey have obtained on request from t he
president o f t he court o f f irst instance o r t he j ustice of t he p eace with extended jurisdiction.
They may a lso s eize t he furniture w hich f urnished t he h ouse or t he f arm, w hen it has b een m oved without t heir consent;
and t hey r etain their p rivilege over them, provided that they have claimed it, i n a ccordance w ith article 2102 of t he C ivil
Code.
Article 3 78 — T he e ffects o f sub-tenants a nd sub-farmers furnishing t he p remises by t hem m ay
occupied, and t he fruits of t he lands w hich t hey s ublet, b e s eized for the r ents a nd l eases due
by t he tenant or f armer from whom t hey hold; but t hey will obtain a r elease b y p roving t hat they have paid without f raud
and w ithout being able t o oppose p ayments made i n a dvance.
Article 3 79 — T he s eizure s hall b e m ade i n the s ame f orm a s t he e xecution; t he p erson s eized may b e a ppointed guardian;
and i f there are f ruits, i t s hall be m ade i n the f orm e stablished b y t he t itle of t he p receding book.
Article 3 80 — A ny creditor, e ven without title, may, without p rior o rder, but w ith permission o f t he p resident o f the f irst
instance o r t he justice of the p eace with e xtended jurisdiction, seize the e ffects f ound i n t he m unicipality in w hich he
lives, b elonging to h is t emporary debtor.
Article 3 81 — T he seizing p arty s hall be t he g uardian of the effects, if they a re in h is hands; o therwise, a guardian
shall b e a ppointed.
Article 3 82 — N o s ale may b e m ade o n t he seizures set out i n t his t itle until they have been d eclared v alid.
Article 3 83 — T he r ules p rescribed f or s eizure, s ale a nd d istribution of funds shall also b e o bserved.
TITLE X III
Of t he seizure-claim.
Article 3 84 — N o s eizure-claim may b e m ade e xcept by o rder of t he
president of t he court of f irst instance o r o f the j ustice o f t he p eace with extended j urisdiction r endered on
request, and t his, u nder p enalty of d amages, b oth a gainst the p arty a nd a gainst the b ailiff or e nforcement a gent w ho
carried out t he seizure.
Article 3 85 — A ny request f or seizure a nd reclamation shall summarily designate t he e ffects.


Article 3 86 — T he judge may allow seizure-claim, even on l egal holidays.
Article 3 87 — I f the person w ith w hom t he effects t hat one w ishes to c laim a re l ocated refuses the d oors or
opposes the seizure, t he matter will b e referred to the j udge; and h owever, t he seizure w ill b e suspended, e xcept for t he
applicant to establish a g arrison a t the g ates.
Article 3 88 — T he seizure-claim will b e made in the same f orm as t he s eizure-execution, except that the person a t w hose
premises i t is made may be appointed g uardian.
Article 389 — The application for t he validity of the s eizure shall be brought before the c ourt of the d omicile o f the p erson
on whom i t i s made; a nd, i f i t i s connected w ith p roceedings already pending, it shall be brought b efore the c ourt seized of
those proceedings.
TITLE XIV
On real e state seizure and its incidents.
Article 3 90 — ( Art. 1 89 of t he decree of J uly 21, 1932).- Registration prior t o the award i s
mandatory r equirement, n amely: in matters of seizure b y the p ursuing c reditor, in m atters o f
auction by one of the joint b idders, for t he p roperty of minors b y the guardians or s ubrogated guardians with
the authorization of the family council.
Article 3 91 — ( Art. 1 90 of t he decree of J uly 21, 1932).- The c ourt shall ex o fficio m ake t he sale subject to
prior registration, otherwise i t will b e null and void.
Article 3 92 — ( Art. 1 93 of t he decree of J uly 21, 1932).- The r egistration p rocedure will c ontinue
in accordance with t he provisions of this decree. After the e xpiry o f t he time limit for f iling objections, the p laintiff shall
file his specifications with t he registry a nd the real e state s eizure p rocedure shall continue until t he award e xclusively i n
accordance with t he forms prescribed in this decree.
Article 3 93 — ( Art. 1 94 of t he decree of J uly 21, 1932).- The a ward m ay o nly take p lace a fter a f inal decision on r egistration.
In the event t hat the decision modifies t he consistency or s ituation
legal a spects o f the building, as defined by t he specifications, the plaintiff will b e required
to publish a corrective statement t o arrive a t the award.
Article 3 94 — ( Art. 5 2 of t he decree of J uly 21, 1932).- The c reditor secured b y a c ertificate i ssued
by the land registrar u nder the c onditions provided for i n A rticle 130 o f the d ecree of
July 2 1, 1 932, or a n enforceable title may, i n the a bsence o f payment o n t he due d ate, c ontinue the s ale
by forced expropriation of t he building o r r egistered b uildings o f its d ebtor. This
Prosecution may only be exercised for c reditors h olding a r egistration c ertificate o n t he affected buildings.
Article 3 95 — ( Art. 5 3 of t he decree of J uly 21, 1932).- In t he event of allocation o f s everal buildings t o
a debt, e xecution m ay not be p ursued simultaneously on e ach of t hem except after authorization
issued in the form of an order upon r equest by t he p resident o f the c ourt or t he justice of t he peace to
extended j urisdiction. The said order must designate t he building(s) w hich m ust be t he subject
of the prosecution. T his order m ust be obtained before t he filing of the s pecifications. It will b e
similarly w hen a seizure o rder, s erved under an u nregistered enforceable t itle, does n ot
not carrying a ny assignment, w ill have b een registered on s everal buildings.
Article 3 96 — ( decree of February 1 4, 1972).-
The c reditor w ho i ntends t o proceed w ith t he f orced sale of a p roperty m ust have a s ummons served o n t he d ebtor in
person or a t home;
This c ommandment i ncludes:


1° t he f ull reproduction o f t he e nforceable title a nd the registration certificate u nder w hich t he order i s d rawn up;
2° t he election o f domicile i f necessary f or t he creditor i n t he place where t he Court o f
First I nstance in w hose jurisdiction t he b uilding i s l ocated;
3° t he p ayment period o f 20 d ays i ncluding that o f notification, a t the end of which t he sale of the property will
be c ontinued;
4° t he location of the p roperty for w hich t he sale is r equested.
Failure t o comply w ith a ny of t he formalities provided f or i n this a rticle s hall render t he order a bsolutely n ull and void.
Article 397 — ( Art. 55 of t he d ecree of J uly 21, 1 932).- The o riginal of the order w ill be e ndorsed u nder p enalty o f
absolute nullity, within a maximum p eriod o f twenty days from t he date o f its n otification a nd including
this day, by t he registrar of the situation of the building a nd s ummarily r egistered on the title of
property, without any mention of t he a mount. Visa and m ention w ill be a ffixed at the request of the
pursuing the a im of w arning t hird p arties of t he existence o f the command and p utting them in
guard a gainst any transaction concerning
the b uilding a nd may infringe the rights of the plaintiff. A c opy of the order w ill be f iled w ith
this effect to t he conservation. If there h as b een a p revious command registered, t he curator w ill register
nevertheless s ummarily this new commandment, b ut i n aiming a t it, h e will mention t he date o f
this first registration as w ell as t he names o f the pursuer a nd t he person b eing pursued. T he proceedings will be
joined, if n ecessary, at the request o f the most diligent party or, ex officio, b y t he court o r justice of
Peace w ith extended c ompetence.
Article 398 — ( Art. 56 of t he d ecree of J uly 21, 1 932).- In t he event o f payment w ithin the twenty-day p eriod s et o ut i n
Article 396, t he registration of t he o rder w ill be c ancelled by t he registrar u pon a s how o f hands
given by t he pursuing c reditor in authentic f orm or under p rivate seal. I n the case o f hand
raised u nder private s eal, t he signature of the creditor w ill be l egalized b y the authority of the place of his d omicile.
The d ebtor and any other interested p erson m ay a lso, in this c ase, c ause the
cancellation of t he r egistration of the o rder, but by p roviding p roof of payment made b y a d uly d ischarged title, t o the
president o f the court o r the j ustice of the peace with extended j urisdiction o f the location of the property.
The M agistrate will be n otified b y a reasoned request w hich w ill necessarily include a n e lection o f domicile
in the p lace w here the c ourt s its a nd to w hich all s upporting d ocuments w ill be a ttached; upon t his request, he w ill issue
an o rder ordering the r emoval or rejecting the request for r emoval. This order m ust be i ssued w ithin three days following
the d ay o n which the request i s submitted t o the
registry. The date o f t his delivery will be n oted b y t he clerk by a n ote placed at t he bottom of the
request. A s s oon as it i s rendered,
the o rder will b e n otified b y e xtract, b y t he clerk to the applicant, a t t he address g iven. T he o rder i ssued i s i n all cases
final and immediately enforceable.
Article 399 — ( Art. 57 of t he d ecree of J uly 21, 1 932).- In t he event o f non-payment within the time limit s et a t
Article 396 t he r egistered order w ill be c onsidered as seizure. The property and i ts i ncome w ill be i mmobilized
under t he conditions provided f or in A rticles 6 82 a nd 685 of the Metropolitan Code o f Civil P rocedure. T he
debtor may n ot alienate t he property o r encumber i t with any r eal r ight or charge until the end o f
the i nstance. The registrar will refuse to make a ny n ew r egistration required f or t his purpose.
Registration of t he f inal a uction report
will r esult i n the c ancellation of t he c ommand. Any a cts r egistered after the date o n which t he command was r egistered
on the l and t itle, i n accordance with Article 3 97 above, w ill be a utomatically n ull and v oid w ith respect t o third p arties.


Article 4 00 - (Art. 58 o f the d ecree of July 21, 1 932).- Within a m aximum period of thirty d ays, f rom the e xpiry o f the p eriod
set i n A rticle 3 96, t he f iling of the s pecifications s hall t ake place, under penalty o f absolute n ullity of the p roceedings, with
the registry of the c ourt or t he J ustice o f the P eace w ith extended j urisdiction in t he j urisdiction of which the p roperty
seized of the s pecifications is l ocated, w ith a view t o the s ale, the d ate o f which shall b e set i n t he d eed o f filing, observing
the deadlines set o ut above. If t he t hirtieth day i s a p ublic holiday o r a Sunday, t he f iling of the s pecifications shall t ake
place o n t he first non-public holiday f ollowing t he t hirtieth.
Article 4 01 - (Art. 59 o f the d ecree of J uly 21, 1 932).- U nder penalty o f absolute nullity o f the proceedings,
the filing with the registry o f the s pecifications w ill be f ollowed, a t l east t hirty days b efore the d ay fixed
for the sale, t he d ay o f a ffixing not being included, by t he affixing of the placards in t he following places:
1° A cupboard in t he c ourtroom where t he sale i s to be c arried out;
2° A cupboard a t t he door o f the c ourt, o n the o utside;
3° A cupboard a t t he door o f the o ffice o f the c onstituency and t he subdivision where t hese
goods a re l ocated;
4° A cupboard i n t he land registry o ffice;
5° A placard o n the building, if i t is a constructed b uilding;
6° A c upboard a t t he seized person's h ome;
7° F our p lacards i n t he streets o r squares o f the location o f the b uilding and, i f the b uilding is
outside a b uilt-up area, i n t he streets o r s quares o f the n earest b uilt-up area.
Article 4 02 - (Art. 60 o f the d ecree of J uly 21, 1 932).- T he p lacards will contain a very b rief s tatement o f
the title under w hich the s ale is b eing p ursued, the n ames a nd a ddresses o f the p laintiff and t he person
seized, the date of t he order and i ts visa, the designation o f the property ( including the name and
number o f t he title, its designation, d istrict, subdivision, t own or v illage, street, district), i ts a pproximate
surface area, i ts consistency, the d ate and p lace o f filing of the specifications, the a sking p rice, t he day,
time a nd place of t he s ale.
The c ost o f the cupboards will b e s et b y a n o rder of t he H igh C ommissioner of t he R epublic, t aken a t t he b oard o f d irectors.
Article 4 03 — ( Art. 61 of t he decree of J uly 21, 1 932).- T he r eport of the affixing o f the placards will be
notified, u nder p enalty o f a bsolute nullity o f the p roceedings, t o the d ebtor and t o the r egistered
creditors, i f any, at t he domicile chosen b y t hem i n t he registration. In t he same a ct, they w ill be
summoned t o t ake note of t he specifications a nd t o attend the sale. Under penalty o f absolute nullity o f
the proceedings, this d esignation m ust b e n otified at l east t hirty days b efore t he day fixed for the sale.
The day o f notification i s not
not included i n t his d eadline.
Article 4 04 - (Art. 62 o f the d ecree of J uly 21, 1 932).- T he s ale m ay n ot, under penalty o f absolute nullity
of the proceedings, be fixed b eyond a maximum p eriod of ninety d ays f rom the day of filing o f the
specifications and n ot including t his d ay. If the n inetieth day falls o n a Sunday or a public h oliday, the
sale may b e fixed f or t he ninety-first d ay.
Article 4 05 - (Art. 63 o f the d ecree of J uly 21, 1 932).- T he a uction t akes p lace i n t he presence of the
debtor or d uly summoned. It takes place b efore t he court or j ustice o f the p eace w ith extended
jurisdiction over the location of t he assets or t he location o f the g reater part o f the a ssets.


Article 4 06 — W ithin e ight days a t t he l atest, a fter the f iling o f the s pecifications, s ummons i s m ade:
1° To the p erson seized, i n person or a t home;
2° To registered creditors, t o take n ote o f t he s pecifications and to h ave their statements a nd o bservations
included w ithin f ive d ays b efore the day s et f or t he s ale, as stated i n A rticle 407.
(Art. 6 4 o f the d ecree o f July 2 1, 1 932).- The order, the s pecifications, a copy o f t he p lacards a ffixed, t he m inutes of
affixing t he p lacards, the s ummons t o r ead t he specifications a nd to attend t he s ale are a ttached t o t he minutes
of adjudication a nd its annexes w ill b e filed w ith t he l and c onservation office a t t he e nd
registration. This formality w ill p urge a ll privileges and mortgages a nd creditors w ill no longer have
action t han on t he p rice. The curator must, a t t he t ime o f r egistration o f t he a uction, take
ex o fficio, f or t he b enefit of a ll beneficiaries, generally a ny, a mortgage as s ecurity for
payment o f the a uction price if i t i s not j ustified or of the p ayment o f t his price, o r of i ts deposit
regular o r e ven compensation or c onfusion. I f the d uplicate of t he t itle deed
is not filed by the b earer, a new d uplicate may b e issued to t he s uccessful bidder upon receipt o f a
judgment, rendered on application, o rdering it. The old duplicate w ill, i n t his case, b e subject t o l egal f orfeiture. A
summary notice i nforming t he public o f t his forfeiture w ill be published i n t he O fficial Journal by the r egistrar a nd entered
on t he title.
Article 4 07 — ( Art. 6 5 of t he d ecree of J uly 2 1, 1 932).- S tatements and observations of any n ature a nd
all p urposes, o ppositions, requests f or n ullity of p roceedings, based, both on means of
form as w ell a s o n s ubstantive m eans, must be r ecorded i n t he s pecifications f ive d ays b efore
less before the d ay f ixed f or the s ale, t he d ay o f t he c onsignment being i ncluded i n t his period. T hey
will c ontain e lection of domicile i n t he p lace where the c ourt o r justice of the p eace w ith jurisdiction s its
extent b efore w hich t he s ale must take p lace. The court i s s eized b y a reasoned request
clearly s pecifying, under p enalty of r ejection, t he g rounds invoked. T his r equest must b e filed w ith the r egistry
at least t hree d ays b efore t he d ate set for t he s ale, the d ay o f f iling with the r egistry b eing i ncluded i n t his period. I t is
immediately transmitted by the C lerk t o the P resident o f the c ourt. T he clerk m ust
also immediately notify a copy, v ia t he p ublic p rosecutor's o ffice, t o the e lected prosecutor at h ome.
The c ourt, after having h eard, a t t he v ery h earing at w hich the s ale is t o take place, the a pplicant, i f
unless he is present himself or b y proxy, in h is p urely oral o bservations which can o nly t arget the m eans specified i n t he
request and u nder the s ame conditions, the p ursuer,
and a fter having collected t he c onclusions of t he public p rosecutor, decides a t t his same hearing. I f the
proceedings a re c ancelled, the o rder m ust be lifted in t his decision. I f
the irregularity o f a formality is noted without t his irregularity leading t o t he c ancellation of t he p roceedings, the d ecision
must i ndicate, if a t l east it o rders n ew p rocedural acts, t he d ate o n which the s ale will take place, a date w hich may not
exceed fifteen d ays. The decision w ill s pecify the
conditions u nder which t he pursuer m ust a gain c omplete the d eclared f ormalities
irregular. N o s tatements or o bservations m ay t hen be presented.
Article 4 08 — ( Art. 6 6 of t he d ecree of J uly 2 1, 1 932).- T he decisions rendered i n t his matter by the c ourt a re, in a ll c ases,
rendered a s a final decision.
Article 4 09 — ( Art. 6 7 of t he d ecree of J uly 2 1, 1 932).- H owever, at a ny t ime p rosecutions and
even a fter s ervice of the o rder, b ut outside t he extreme period of five d ays f ixed a t
Article 407, the n ullity of t he o rder may b e invoked. It will be requested from the C ourt o f
First Instance o r t o the J ustice of the P eace w ith extended j urisdiction of t he l ocation of the p roperty, b y request
reasoned i n w hich t he a pplicant will c ompulsorily elect d omicile in t he p lace of
jurisdiction. This request will c learly specify, u nder p enalty o f r ejection, the g rounds invoked. It will be
filed with the r egistry and immediately t ransmitted b y the c lerk to t he P resident of t he c ourt. The latter
will s et, a t the b ottom of t he r equest, the h earing to w hich the c ase will be called; this hearing must h ave
place w ithin a maximum p eriod of e ight days, from t he d ay t he a pplication i s f iled w ith the r egistry. T his
The h earing d ate will b e notified with a copy o f the r equest at l east t hree days b efore t he s cheduled d ate
by t he clerk, t hrough the p rosecution, to t he p rosecutor and the a pplicant, a t t heir a ddress for service. T he court, o n the
day f ixed f or the h earings, a nd without a ny a djournment being g ranted, w ill hear t he


applicant, if a t least h e is p resent o r represented, i n h is purely oral o bservations which m ay only refer t o
the grounds set o ut i n the application a nd, u nder t he s ame c onditions, t he p rosecutor, and will c ollect the
conditions o f t he public prosecutor. The Court will r ule w ithin a m aximum p eriod of t wenty d ays, f rom t he
day of t he hearing to w hich t he case w as called.
During the c ourse of t he p roceedings and from t he d ay the p etitioner receives it,
the f ormalities relating to s eizure and sale w ill b e s uspended, except f or t he f ormality of t he v isa i n a rticle
397 which m ust a lways take place. If t he order i s cancelled, i t w ill b e l ifted. If t he c ontinuation of p roceedings
is o rdered, t he decision will s pecify the p rocedure w hich m ust be f ollowed i n t hese c ases.
purposes, taking into account t he requirements a nd d eadlines set out i n A rticles 397 e t s eq. The d ecision
The d ecision r endered i n this matter by t he court w ill, i n a ll cases, be f inal.
Article 4 10 - ( Art. 6 8 o f the d ecree of J uly 2 1, 1932).- I n t he e vent that t he o rder i s not f ollowed u p o r in t he
event that the award provided f or by the s pecifications or fixed by
If the court decision does not t ake place, the p erson seized may still, by r easoned a pplication, request interim relief.
the l ifting of the order. This r equest will b e a ddressed t o the P resident o f the c ourt before w hich the s ale w as to t ake p lace.
A copy o f this r equest w ill b e notified t o the plaintiff, a t t he a ddress given, v ia the p ublic prosecutor's office, by the C lerk,
at l east t hree d ays b efore t he date o f the interim relief. This date will be indicated a t t he b ottom of the r equest. The o rder
issued will, i n all cases, b e final a nd i mmediately enforceable.
Article 4 11 — The a uction takes p lace a s i ndicated i n A rticles 704 et s eq. of t he C ode o f C ivil P rocedure
(Metropolitan).
(Art. 6 9 of the decree o f J uly 21, 1932).- T he overbidding t akes p lace i n a ccordance with articles 7 08 and
following of t he Code of Civil P rocedure (Metropolitan).
Article 4 12 — (Art. 7 0 o f t he decree o f J uly 2 1, 1932).- W hen there i s reason for a w ild bid, it i s carried out
according to t he method i ndicated in articles 396 a nd following o f t his C ode.
Article 4 13 - ( Art. 7 1 o f the d ecree of J uly 2 1, 1932).- I t i s open to t he p arties, i n o rder t o a void resorting to
the p rocedure which h as j ust b een described, to agree i n t he m ortgage constitutive act or in a n a ct
later, but on the condition that this act i s registered, t hat, i n t he a bsence of p ayment o f t he d ue d ate, the
creditor may have t he mortgaged property sold before a N otary o f the p lace w here t he a ssets a re
located. I n this c ase t he sale t akes p lace a t p ublic auction before a n otary appointed b y s imple o rder i ssued
at t he request o f t he President of t he C ourt or t he J ustice o f t he P eace w ith extended j urisdiction, a fter
completion of t he formalities provided for in A rticles 396 e t s eq.
Article 4 14 — The s aid Notary r eceives, w here applicable, the d eclaration o f o verbidding u nder A rticle 4 11.
TITLE XV
From distribution by contribution.
Article 4 15 — If t he funds s et a side or the s ale p rice are n ot s ufficient to p ay the c reditors,
the g arnishee or the o fficer who made t he s ale w ill b e r equired to deposit the f unds eight days after t he e nd
seizure o r sale o perations, l ess: for the t hird party s eized of the t axed c osts o f i ts
affirmative declaration i f t hey h ave not b een charged to h im, for t he s elling o fficer of his costs t axed by t he
Judge o n t he minute o f the r eport.
Article 4 16 — The m ost d iligent party s hall r efer t he m atter to t he P resident of t he C ourt or t he J ustice o f t he Peace
extended jurisdiction f or the p urpose o f s ummoning c reditors and the s eized party. This summons
is m ade by registered l etter with acknowledgment o f r eceipt, s ent by t he C lerk. T he date of t he
meeting must b e chosen, taking into account t he d istance l imits of a rticles 1 4 and 15 of t his Code.
Creditors who do not c omply w ith this summons or who do n ot have t hemselves represented t here, will n ot
will n ot participate in the d istribution. Mention of t he f orfeiture i ncurred will b e m ade i n t he l etter
recommended sent b y the R egistrar.


Article 4 17 — O n the day fixed f or the meeting, t he M agistrate, assisted b y his C lerk, hears t he p arties p resent, verifies the
claims, proceeds w ith t he distribution among the b eneficiaries and submits to t hem the d istribution s tatement.
Article 4 18 — I f t here i s n o dispute, a r eport is i mmediately drawn u p. T his r eport, which w ill be filed w ith the m inutes of t he
court r egistry, is s igned b y a ll p articipants or states that they d o not k now or cannot. I t is e nforceable and carries a legal
mortgage. Creditors obtain p ayment f rom the Caisse d es dépôts et c onsignations u pon a mandate i ssued t o t hem b y the
Clerk.
Article 4 19 — I f t here i s a d ispute or disagreement o ver t he p roposed distribution, t he M agistrate shall record the
observations a nd explanations of the parties and, r uling b y order, s tops t he d istribution o f
money a nd o rders t he delivery of mandates t o e ach o f t he c reditors.
Article 4 20 — A n a ppeal a gainst this order m ay be lodged with the C ourt of A ppeal within t he t ime l imits s et o ut i n A rticle
185 of t his C ode.
Article 4 21 — I f t he seized debt i s d ue in s uccessive installments and a new c reditor appears w ho produces a declaration t o
the r egistry after the amicable or j udicial distribution, t he M agistrate summons t he c reditors a t h is r equest and the p rocedure
is r epeated a s s tated a bove.
TITLE XVI
Order.
Article 4 22 — T he successful t enderer having paid w ithin t he t ime l imit s et b y the s pecifications, b ut w ho does not
may i n no case exceed six w eeks, in t he hands o f the c lerk or the a ppointed n otary, in
at the s ame time as t he main a uction price t he amount of t he c osts i ncurred t o a chieve the i mplementation
sale and, where applicable, registration when t his h as been made n ecessary, costs t he f igure o f w hich
duly s topped and taxed b y t he Judge w ill have b een a nnounced b efore the a uction, the c lerk or the N otary depositing the
said s ums, establishes upon e xpiry of t he period g ranted for the d eclaration o f o verbidding a statement o f d istribution o f
the p rice between t he creditors of t he expropriated owner.
For this p urpose, the claims are c lassified in t he following order:
1° The legal costs incurred to a chieve t he r ealization of t he p roperty sold a nd the d istribution o f t he p rice itself;
2° C laims secured by a c onventional o r forced mortgage, e ach according t o t he r ank w hich b elongs to i t, w ith
regard t o the date of i ts p ublication;
3° T he privileged c laims listed in a rticle 2101 of t he C ivil C ode;
4° Claims based on enforceable titles, w hen the b eneficiaries have i ntervened
to the procedure by w ay of opposition, the l atter at t he s ame r ank a nd to t he m ark the f ranc between
they.
The s urplus, if a ny, i s a llocated to t he expropriated owner.
Article 4 23 — T he distribution statement is s ubmitted t o t he i nterested p arties a nd, i f approved by them,
They a re i mmediately given t he sums d ue to t hem a gainst receipt, a nd, i f necessary,
release of the mortgage g ranted i n t heir favor.
Article 4 24 — I f t here i s d isagreement b etween the various creditors, e ither o n the r ank t o b e attributed to t heir c laim,
either o n t he a mount of t he sums t o b e r eturned to t hem, t he d istribution o f t he p rize can only t ake p lace b y judicial order.


Article 425 — I n this case, the sums paid by t he s uccessful b idder a re d eposited with t he C aisse d es
deposits a nd c onsignments, w ithin a p eriod of eight d ays a t the l atest, under the n ame o f the C lerk o r Notary
committed, and the d istribution statement c ompleted by t he s tatement of t he p arties' statements and observations is
submitted, a ccompanied by a ll useful documents, t o t he P resident of t he C ourt o r t o the J ustice o f t he P eace with e xtended
jurisdiction o f t he d istrict.
Article 426 — T his Magistrate s ummons, within eight d ays o f the d elivery o f the s tatement, t he c reditors w hose
names appear t herein. T his summons is made b y r egistered l etters s ent by t he C lerk and addressed to the
interested p arties, b oth to their actual d omicile and to their elected domicile.
The e xpropriated owner a nd t he successful bidder a re a lso summoned i n the s ame f orm.
The d ate o f the meeting m ust b e c hosen a s stated in the a forementioned A rticle 416.
Creditors who d o n ot appear are p ermanently b arred.
Article 427 — O n t he day fixed f or the meeting, the M agistrate hears the o bservations and explanations o f the
parties and r uling by w ay of order, it s ets the o rder, orders t he d elivery o f the c ollocation s lips to each o f the
creditors coming in useful rank a nd a t the s ame t ime pronounces t he r elease of
the b uilding w hich i s freed from a ll mortgage charges with w hich it was encumbered e ven t hough the s ecured
debts could not have been s ettled in whole o r in part.
Article 428 — T he o rder p rovided for i n the p receding article i s subject t o appeal as stated in
Article 420 above.
Article 429 — D ispatch o f the a micable d istribution s tatement or the f inal decision c losing t he o rder
judicial certificate i s issued to the successful bidder, for t he p urpose o f registration in the l and register. This r egistration
will p urge all l iens a nd m ortgages.
PART T WO - Miscellaneous Procedures.
BOOK ONE
TITLE I - Offers of payment a nd d eposit.
Article 430 — A ny record o f offers shall d esignate t he o bject offered, so t hat no o ther may be s ubstituted; and
if it is c ash, it s hall c ontain the enumeration a nd quality thereof.
Article 431 — T he r eport will mention t he response, refusal or acceptance of the c reditor, and whether h e
signed, refused or d eclared t hat he c ould not or did n ot k now how to sign.
Article 432 — I f t he creditor refuses t he offers, the d ebtor may, i n order to free h imself, d eposit t he t hing o r
the s um o ffered b y o bserving t he formalities p rescribed by A rticle 1259 o f the C ivil Code.
Article 433 — T he a pplication which may be b rought, either for t he v alidity or for the n ullity o f the o ffers o r the
deposit, will b e m ade according t o the rules established for the p rincipal applications; i f it is incidental, i t will
be m ade by p etition.
Article 434 — T he j udgment w hich declares t he o ffers v alid will o rder, in the c ase w here the d eposit
would n ot h ave y et taken p lace, t hat due t o t he c reditor's f ailure t o have r eceived t he s um or thing o ffered, it
will b e r ecorded; i t w ill pronounce t he cessation o f interest, from the d ay of realization.
Article 435 — V oluntary o r o rdered deposit will a lways be t he r esponsibility of the o ppositions, if any
exists, and by r eporting them t o the creditor.
Article 436 — T he s urplus i s regulated by t he provisions of the C ivil C ode relating to offers of payment a nd
deposit.


TITLE I I
Ways t o t ake to o btain a c opy o f a d ocument or t o have i t a mended.
Article 437 — A N otary or o ther custodian who refuses t o deliver a copy or a copy of a document to the i nterested
parties i n their direct name, h eirs o r b eneficiaries, shall b e s entenced to d o so, upon prompt s ervice o f summons,
given w ith the p ermission of t he P resident of the C ourt o f First Instance o r t he J ustice of the P eace w ith extended
jurisdiction.
Article 438 — T he j udgment s hall b e e xecuted notwithstanding o pposition or r eminder.
Article 439 — T he p arty w ishing t o obtain a c opy o f an unregistered o r e ven i mperfect document shall s ubmit i ts
request t o the P resident of the C ourt of First I nstance o r t o t he J ustice of the P eace w ith extended j urisdiction,
except f or t he e xecution o f laws and r egulations relating to registration.
Article 440 — T he d elivery will be m ade, if n ecessary, i n execution of t he o rder issued following t he r equest; and
this w ill b e m entioned a t t he b ottom of t he c opy d elivered.
Article 441 — I n t he e vent o f refusal by t he N otary o r d epositary, t he m atter will b e r eferred to the P resident of the
Court of F irst Instance o r t o the J ustice o f the Peace w ith extended j urisdiction.
Article 442 — T he p arty w ho wishes t o be i ssued a second gross, e ither of a minute o f a n act, or b y way o f an
exemplification of a deposited gross, shall s ubmit, f or t his purpose, a request to the P resident of t he C ourt of First
Instance o r t o t he J ustice o f the P eace with extended j urisdiction; by v irtue of the o rder which i s i ssued, it s hall
summon the N otary to make t he d elivery on the d ay and time i ndicated, and the i nterested p arties to appear there;
mention s hall b e m ade o f this o rder at the b ottom of the s econd gross, a s well as the s um f or w hich i t may be
executed, if t he d ebt i s paid o r a ssigned in p art.
Article 443 — I n t he e vent o f a d ispute, t he p arties s hall p roceed i n summary p roceedings.
Article 444 — A nyone w ho, during the c ourse o f p roceedings, w ishes t o obtain a copy or e xtract of a document in
which he w as not a p arty, shall p rovide that it w ill b e s ettled.
Article 445 — T he a pplication f or c ompulsory relief shall b e made b y petition f rom d efense attorney to defense
attorney or b y s ummons f rom party t o party. It s hall b e brought t o the h earing and judged s ummarily w ithout any
procedure.
Article 446 — T he j udgment s hall b e e nforceable, notwithstanding appeal o r o pposition.
Article 447 — T he m inutes o f the c ompulsive e xamination o r c ollation shall b e drawn u p and the d ispatch or c opy
delivered b y t he N otary or d epositary, unless the C ourt which o rdered it h as appointed one of its members, o r a ny
other Judge o f t he C ourt of First Instance, or a nother N otary.
Article 448 — I n a ll c ases, t he p arties may a ttend the m inutes a nd include in them a ny statements t hey s ee fit.
Article 449 — I f t he c osts a nd e xpenses o f t he original of the d ocument are due to t he d epositary, h e m ay refuse t o
send it u ntil h e h as b een p aid t he s aid c osts, i n addition to those of sending.
Article 450 — T he p arties may c ollate the o riginal c opy, which w ill b e read b y t he d epositary; if they c laim that they
are n ot i n conformity, the m atter will be r eferred o n the d ay indicated i n the r eport t o the P resident of the
Court of F irst I nstance o r t o the J ustice o f the Peace w ith extended j urisdiction, who will d o the c ollation; for t his
purpose the d epositary will be r equired to provide the o riginal copy.
The c osts of t he r eport, as w ell as t hose of t he t ransport of the d epositary will b e advanced b y t he a pplicant.


Article 4 51 — The C lerks a nd c ustodians o f p ublic r egisters w ill issue them without o rder of
justice, dispatch, c opy o r extract to all a pplicants, at t he expense o f t heir r ights, s ubject to c osts,
damages.
Article 4 52 — A s econd e nforceable copy o f a judgment shall n ot b e i ssued t o t he same party
that b y virtue of an order of the President o f t he Court w here i t was r endered o r o f t he Justice of t he Peace
extended c ompetence.
The f ormalities prescribed for t he delivery of second copies of deeds b efore N otaries w ill be o bserved.
Article 4 53 — Anyone w ishing t o have a c ivil s tatus d ocument r ectified s hall submit a request to t he P resident of t he Court
of First Instance o r t o the Justice o f the Peace w ith extended j urisdiction, who s hall rule by o rder or r efer the m atter to t he
Court.
A c opy o f the order will b e filed with the registry.
When the President h as r eferred the case t o t he Tribunal, a decision w ill be t aken on the conclusions o f t he
public prosecutor. The Judges will o rder, i f t hey d eem it appropriate, t hat t he interested p arties b e
called, and that t he family c ouncil will b e convened beforehand. I f it i s n ecessary to c all the interested p arties,
the r equest w ill b e made by writ w ithout preliminary c onciliation. I t will be m ade by a ct
of d efense l awyer, if t he parties are i n p roceedings.
Article 4 54 — In t he event that there is n o o ther party than the applicant for rectification a nd where t here
believes he has cause to complain a bout t he order or j udgment, h e m ay, w ithin t wo m onths f rom the
pronounced, a ppeal to the Court o f Appeal b y s ubmitting a request to t he first p resident on
which will b e indicated o n a day w hen a decision will be t aken in c hambers on the conclusions of t he
public prosecutor.
Article 4 55 — No r ectification or change may be m ade to t he act, but t he operative part o f t he rectification
orders, judgments a nd r ulings w ill b e transcribed i n t he registers o f
the civil registrar as s oon a s it has been g iven to him; mention o f this w ill b e m ade i n t he margin of the reformed d ocument
and t he a ct will n o l onger be issued e xcept w ith t he ordered r ectifications, under p enalty of a ll d amages and
interest against t he custodian o f the registers who i ssued i t.
Article 4 56 — The o perative p art o f any o rders, judgments and r ulings, the transcription o f w hich i n t he civil
status r egisters has b een o rdered, must state the first n ames a nd s urnames of t he
parties involved a s w ell as t he places a nd dates of t he acts i n t he margin of w hich t he t ranscription must be
mentioned.
This t ranscription w ill o nly cover t he operative part. T he qualities a nd reasons m ust not be n otified t o t he civil
registrar by t he parties or transmitted by the P ublic P rosecutor.
TITLE III
Of some p rovisions relating to the sending i nto p ossession of t he property of a n a bsent p erson.
Article 4 57 — In t he case p rovided f or b y Article 1 12 of t he Civil C ode, a nd to h ave i t r uled on, it will be p resented
request to t he President o f the Court. On t his request, to w hich t he exhibits and d ocuments will be a ttached,
the j udgment w ill b e d elivered after hearing the public p rosecutor.
Article 4 58 — The s ame p rocedure will a pply in t he case o f p rovisional possession authorized b y A rticle 1 20 of
the C ivil C ode.
TITLE IV
On the i ntervention of justice regarding the r ights o f s pouses.


Article 4 59 - (Art. 29 D ecember 1948).- The spouse w ho wishes t o be authorized or empowered b y the c ourts in t he c ases
provided f or b y Articles 2 15, 217, 219, 2 23, 1422, 1 428, 1 528, 1 551, 1 555, 1 556, 1 557, 1 558, 2 144, 2 145 of the C ivil C ode o r by
other p rovisions, shall submit a request to the p resident, so that a decision may be made by the c ourt t o this effect,
producing the n ecessary j ustifications in s upport o f his request.
Article 460 — (Art. D ecember 2 9, 1948).- If one of the spouses i s unable t o express his o r her w ill as a result o f
circumstances provided f or in Article 2 13 of t he C ivil Code, the other spouse s hall p resent
request to the President, j ustifying t he causes w hich prevent the manifestation of the will of his
spouse and t he need for the authorization o r authorization r equested.
If the r equest f or authorization tends t o override the opposition or refusal o f the spouse, t he spouse
applicant will submit a request to the President t o set t he d ay o n which his s pouse w ill be s ummoned
before the council chamber, t o give t he reasons f or h is o pposition or refusal. T he court
will hear t he s pouse b efore r uling, unless the latter d oes not a ppear a fter h aving b een
regularly cited.
Article 461 — (D. December 2 9, 1 948).- The judgments of authorization a nd empowerment r eferred t o in a rticles
which p recede w ill be m ade in chambers, o n t he report o f a j udge a ppointed for t his purpose, and after
conclusion o f the public prosecutor.
They w ill s et the conditions t o which the execution of their d ecision w ill be s ubject, a s well a s the extent o f
the a uthorization o r power of representation granted.
Article 462 — (D. 29 December 1 948).- If one o f the spouses f ails t o fulfil t heir o bligation t o contribute to the
costs o f t he marriage under the conditions provided f or i n A rticle 214 of the Civil C ode, the other spouse m ay
obtain from the Justice o f the P eace authorization to seize a nd receive, i n p roportion to their n eeds, a s hare
of t he s alary, p roduct o f work or income o f their s pouse.
The C lerk w ill summon the spouses b efore the Justice of t he P eace by r egistered letter indicating t he p urpose of t he r equest.
The s pouses m ust a ppear i n person, u nless absolutely and duly justified.
The j udgment r endered will be provisionally e nforceable, notwithstanding o pposition or appeal.
The n otification of this judgment made to the s pouse a nd third parties s eized b y t he spouse w ho benefits from
it will be worth a warding t o the latter, without further procedure, the sums whose seizure will be a uthorized.
At a ny time a nd even when it has b ecome final, the judgment m ay b e m odified at t he r equest of either s pouse
when this modification is j ustified by a change in t heir r espective s ituations.
TITLE V
Separation of property.
Article 463 — No application f or separation of property may b e m ade without authorization
prior, w hich the President m ust g ive o n the r equest presented t o him for t his purpose. May
nevertheless t he president, b efore g iving authorization, m ay m ake a ny o bservations t hat a ppear to him
suitable.
Article 464 — The Clerk of the C ourt s hall enter, w ithout delay, i n a table placed for t his p urpose in t he
courtroom, an extract of the application f or s eparation, w hich shall c ontain:
1° T he date of request;


2° The names, first n ames, professions a nd residence o f t he spouses;
3° The names a nd address of t he a ppointed d efense l awyer w ho w ill be r equired to s ubmit, f or t his purpose, the
said extract t o the c lerk within three days o f t he request.
If t here is a commercial court, such a n e xtract w ill be i nserted i n the tables p laced for t his purpose i n the courtroom o f s aid
court. This i nsertion w ill b e c ertified by t he C lerk.
Article 4 65 - T he same e xtract w ill b e i nserted, in the prosecution o f t he woman, in one of t he newspapers printed i n the
place where the C ourt sits and if there are none, i n one of t hose established in the territory.
The s aid insertion will b e j ustified b y a c opy o f t he newspaper b earing the printer's signature.
Article 4 66 — No judgment m ay be p ronounced on t he application for s eparation, e xcept for p rotective a cts, until t wo
months after c ompliance with the f ormalities p rescribed above, which shall b e o bserved u nder penalty o f n ullity, which
may be opposed by t he h usband o r by h is creditors.
Article 4 67 — The husband's confession w ill not c onstitute proof, even if there are no c reditors.
Article 4 68 — The husband's creditors m ay, until t he final judgment, summon the wife's defense a ttorney, by a document
from defense attorney to d efense attorney, to c ommunicate to t hem t he application for s eparation a nd the supporting
documents, o r even intervene for the p reservation of t heir r ights, without p reliminary conciliation.
Article 4 69 - ( D. 18 May 1 934).- T he judgment o f s eparation w ill be r ead publicly, the hearing t aking place, at the local
commercial court, if there is o ne; an e xtract o f this j udgment c ontaining the date, t he designation o f t he court w here i t was
rendered, t he s urnames, f irst n ames, professions a nd residence o f t he spouses w ill be i nserted o n a table f or t his purpose
and d isplayed for one year in the a uditorium of t he Courts of F irst Instance and Commercial C ourts of t he husband's
domicile even w hen he i s not a t rader; and if there i s no c ommercial c ourt, in the main r oom o f t he common house of t he
husband's domicile.
When one o f the s pouses is a trader, t he separation j udgment will be s ubject t o t he formalities p rescribed by t he special
provisions included in this regard in the s pecial d ecree f or e ach colony containing public administration r egulations for
determining the c onditions of a pplication o f the l aw of M arch 18, 1919 creating a trade register. This judgment will be
transmitted by e xtract, w ithin o ne month of its d ate to t he Clerk o f t he Commercial C ourt o r t he Civil Court w hich acts as
such, r esponsible for registration and entry i n the trade r egister.
The w oman m ay only begin t he e xecution of t he j udgment f rom the day o n which the above formalities have b een completed, without i t being n ecessary to w ait f or
the expiry o f the aforementioned period o f one year.
All without prejudice to the provisions s et out in A rticle 1445 of t he Civil Code.
Article 4 70 — If the f ormalities prescribed in this title have b een o bserved, the husband's creditors w ill no l onger be
entitled, after the e xpiry of t he period r eferred to in the preceding article, t o a ppeal by t hird p arty o pposition a gainst t he
judgment o f s eparation.
Article 4 71 — The woman's r enunciation o f the c ommunity will be m ade a t the registry o f t he Court h earing the application
for s eparation.
TITLE VI
On l egal s eparation and divorce.


Article 4 72 — T he spouse w ho w ishes t o apply for l egal separation shall be required t o s ubmit to t he P resident o f t he C ourt
of h is or h er domicile a r equest s ummarily c ontaining t he f acts; h e or she shall a ttach s upporting documents, if any.
Article 4 73 — T he application shall b e a nswered by an order stating that the p arties s hall appear b efore the P resident o n the
day t o be indicated i n t he said order.
Article 4 74 — T he parties shall b e r equired to a ppear i n p erson, w ithout being able t o b e assisted
of defense l awyers or advisors.
Article 4 75 — T he President shall m ake to both spouses the r epresentations he deems a ppropriate to b ring about
reconciliation; i f h e c annot a chieve t his, he s hall issue, following the f irst order, a second o rder stating that, s ince h e has
not been able t o r econcile the parties, he r efers them t o a pply w ithout prior s ummons t o t he c onciliation office; h e s hall
authorize by t he same order t he wife t o proceed w ith the a pplication a nd to r eside separately; he shall o rder that the e ffects
for the w ife's d aily u se shall be h anded o ver t o her. The applications for interim relief shall be brought t o t he h earing.
Article 4 76 — T he case will be i nvestigated and judged under t he c onditions provided for in A rticle 239 of t he C ivil C ode.
An extract from the judgment which p ronounces the s eparation will b e inserted i n t he t ables displayed i n t he c ourtroom a s
stated i n article 469.
Article 4 77 — T he procedure to b e f ollowed in m atters o f d ivorce r emains t hat laid down by the C ivil C ode.
TITLE VII
Opinions o f the family council.
Article 4 78 — W hen t he appointment o f a g uardian has been made o utside his p resence, i t will b e notified t o h im, a t t he
diligence of t he member o f the assembly w ho w ill h ave been designated b y him; said n otification will be
made by bailiff's act w ithin t hree days of t he deliberation, in a ddition to t he t ime l imits o f d istance b etween t he p lace w here
the m eeting was held and the guardian's home.
Article 4 79 — W henever t he deliberations of the f amily council are n ot u nanimous, t he o pinion
of each of t he members who c ompose i t w ill b e m entioned in t he m inutes.
The g uardian, s ubrogated guardian o r curator, even m embers o f t he a ssembly, m ay a ppeal t o t he C ourt of J ustice of t he
Peace with e xtended jurisdiction against the deliberation; t hey w ill make t heir r equest against t he m embers who were of t he
opinion of the deliberation.
Article 4 80 — I n a ll c ases where a d eliberation subject t o a pproval is i nvolved, a copy
of the d eliberation w ill b e a ttached to t he request p resented t o t he P resident o f t he C ourt or to t he J ustice of t he P eace at
extended jurisdiction, which, o rder a t t he bottom o f s aid r equest, will order the c ommunication t o t he
public p rosecutor a nd will s et a d ay f or the hearing in c hambers.
Article 4 81 — T he Public Prosecutor will g ive his c onclusions at t he b ottom of t he s aid o rder; t he c opy o f t he a pproval
judgment w ill be p laced a fter t he said conclusions, in t he s ame n otebook.
Article 4 82 — I f t he guardian, o r other person r esponsible for pursuing t he a pproval, d oes n ot d o so within t he t ime l imit s et
by deliberation, o r, f ailing a d ecision, within a p eriod o f t wo w eeks, o ne of t he m embers o f
the a ssembly m ay pursue the approval against the g uardian, and at t he l atter's e xpense w ithout repetition.
Article 4 83 — T hose m embers of the assembly w ho b elieve t hey s hould oppose t he a pproval shall declare t his by
extrajudicial act t o t he person responsible for p ursuing it; a nd if they h ave not b een
called, they will be a ble t o f ile a n o pposition to the j udgment.


Article 4 84 — J udgments rendered on d eliberation o f the f amily c ouncil s hall b e subject t o appeal.
TITLE VIII
Of the ban.
Article 4 85 — I n a ny p rosecution for p rohibition, a cts of imbecility, insanity, or fury
will be stated i n t he r equest submitted to the P resident o f the C ourt o r to the J ustice of the P eace w ith j urisdiction
extended; s upporting documents will be attached a nd witnesses will be indicated.
Article 4 86 — T he President o f the C ourt or t he J ustice of the P eace w ith extended jurisdiction s hall o rder the
communication of the r equest t o the p ublic prosecutor, and will set a d ay for t he h earing in c hambers o f the
advice.
Article 4 87 — O n the c onclusions o f the P ublic Prosecutor, t he C ourt s hall o rder t hat the c ouncil
family, f ormed a ccording t o the m ethod d etermined by the C ivil C ode, s ection I V of chapter I I under the h eading of "minority,
guardianship a nd emancipation", w ill give i ts opinion on the s tatus o f the p erson w hose p rohibition is requested.
Article 4 88 — T he request and the o pinion of the f amily c ouncil s hall b e served on the d efendant before his interrogation i s
carried out.
If t he interrogation a nd t he d ocuments produced are i nsufficient a nd i f the f acts c an b e justified by witnesses, the C ourt
will order, if n ecessary, an investigation.
He m ay o rder, i f c ircumstances require, t hat t he i nvestigation b e carried o ut without t he p resence of the d efendant; b ut in
this c ase, h is c ounsel may represent h im.
Article 4 89 — T he appeal lodged b y the p erson w hose ban has b een p ronounced will be directed a gainst t he p erson
provoking it.
The a ppeal l odged by the p erson p rovoking the appeal, or by one of the m embers of the a ssembly, will be lodged a gainst
the person w hose ban was provoked.
In the event of the a ppointment of counsel, t he appeal of the p erson t o whom i t has been g iven will be directed a gainst t he
person p rovoking it.
Article 4 90 — I f t here i s n o appeal a gainst the j udgment of prohibition, or if it is confirmed on appeal, it will be
provided for t he appointment o f a guardian and a substitute guardian for the i nterdicted person, i n accordance w ith t he r ules
prescribed under the heading " opinions o f the family council".
The p rovisional administrator a ppointed pursuant t o Article 4 97 o f the C ivil C ode w ill cease h is duties and r eport t o the
guardian, if he is n ot himself.
Article 4 91 — T he judgment w hich pronounces a defense t o pleading, c ompromising, b orrowing, r eceiving a
movable capital or g ive discharge o f it, a lienate i t or mortgage i t without the a ssistance o f advice, will be
posted and registered with the r egistry in t he f orm prescribed by article 5 01 o f the C ivil C ode.
Article 4 92 — R equests for t he l ifting of a b an or for judicial advice s hall b e submitted,
as to the instruction and judgment and as t o the publicity o f the d ecision to the s ame rules a s t he
requests for p rohibition or a ppointment of counsel.
BOOK I I
Procedures relating t o the o pening o f an estate.


TITLE I
On t he affixing of seals after death
Article 4 93 — Subject to the a pplication o f s pecial provisions r elating to successions
vacant and those o f article 5 of the d ecree of August 22, 1887, also subject t o the agreements
diplomatic which may e xist w hen the d eceased i s of foreign nationality, the affixing of
sealed a fter death w ill be m ade b y the P residents of Courts, J ustices of the Peace w ith e xtended j urisdiction,
Justices of t he p eace with ordinary j urisdiction, and i n their absence, b y t heir deputies.
In t he event of impediment o r emergency, t he Judge may delegate the Clerk f or s ealing operations. This
delegation i s not s ubject to appeal and w ill not require registration.
Article 4 94 — The J udges and t heir deputies w ill use a s pecial seal, which will remain in their hands and t he
imprint o f which will be d eposited in the r egistry of the Court o f First Instance.
Article 4 95 — The a ffixing of seals m ay b e required:
1° B y all t hose who claim a right to the succession or to the community;
2° B y all creditors b ased on a n e nforceable t itle o r authorized b y p ermission either from the
President of the C ourt of First Instance, o r of the Justice of the Peace w ith e xtended j urisdiction or with
ordinary jurisdiction where t he s eal m ust be a ffixed;
3° I n the e vent of absence, either o f t he spouse, o r of the heirs o r of one o f them, by t he persons w ho
lived w ith the d eceased, a nd b y h is servants a nd domestics.
Article 4 96 — Emancipated minor c laimants and c reditors m ay request t he affixing of seals without the
assistance of their curator.
If t hey a re unemancipated minors, a nd if t hey do n ot have a g uardian, o r if o ne i s absent, it m ay be r equested
by one o f their parents.
Article 4 97 — The s eal w ill be a ffixed, either at the request o f the public prosecutor, o r on t he declaration of
the mayor or deputy mayor o f the m unicipality or the head of the administrative unit, and e ven ex o fficio b y t he Judge:
1° I f the m inor i s without a guardian, and t he seal is not required by a p arent;
2° I f the s pouse, o r if t he h eirs o r one o f them are absent;
3° I f the d eceased w as a public depositary, in which case the seal will only be a ffixed for t he reason
of t his d eposit and f or t he o bjects w hich compose i t.
Article 4 98 — The s eal m ay o nly b e a ffixed b y t he President o f the Court, the Justice of the Peace
extended o r ordinary j urisdiction of the p remises or by t heir substitutes or d elegates.
Article 4 99 — If the s eal w as affixed before t he burial, t he Judge will note in his report,
the time w hen it was r equired to be a ffixed and t he causes which delayed e ither the requisition o r the affixing.
Article 5 00 — The a ffixing report w ill contain:
1° T he d ate o f the y ear, m onth, d ay a nd h our;
2° T he r easons for t he a ffixing;


3° The n ame, profession a nd r esidence of t he a pplicant, if any, a nd h is election o f domicile in the
municipality where the s eal i s affixed, i f he d oes n ot reside there;
4° If t here is no requesting party, the r eport will state t hat the s eal was a ffixed
ex officio or o n the r equest or o n the d eclaration of o ne o f t he o fficials n amed in article 497;
5° The o rder permitting the s ealing, i f one has b een i ssued;
6° The appearances and s tatements o f t he p arties;
7° T he designation o f the p laces, offices, s afes, c upboards, on the o penings o f which the s eal
has been a ffixed;
8° A summary description o f the e ffects which a re n ot sealed;
9° The o ath, at the c losing o f the a ffixing, b y t hose w ho r eside in the p lace, t hat they have not diverted
anything, s een n or known t hat anything has been d iverted directly or i ndirectly;
10° T he establishment o f the g uardian p resented, if he h as the r equired qualities, e xcept if he d oes n ot
have them or i f h e is not p resented, to e stablish o ne ex officio by t he J udge.
Article 501 — T he heads of l ocks on which t he s eal has b een a ffixed shall remain until i t is l ifted,
in the hands o f the C lerk, who w ill make a n ote, on the r eport, o f the d elivery which h as been m ade to him
made, and n either t he J udge nor the C lerk m ay go, u ntil t he l ifting, to the h ouse where t he s eal is, to
unless required, o r u nless t heir t ransport has b een p receded b y a r easoned order.
Article 502 — I f, during the a ffixing, a w ill or o ther s ealed paper is f ound, the J udge w ill note i ts e xternal f orm, t he
seal and the subscription, i f a ny, and will i nitial t he e nvelope with t he
parties present, if t hey know or c an, and w ill i ndicate t he d ay and time when the p ackage w ill be
presented t o him to the P resident of the C ourt o f F irst I nstance or t o t he J ustice of t he P eace with e xtended jurisdiction
or will b e opened b y himself i f h e fulfills these functions. H e will mention e verything on the r eport, w hich w ill be
signed by t he p arties, otherwise mention w ill be m ade of t heir r efusal.
Article 503 — At t he request o f a ny i nterested p arty, t he J udge s hall, before affixing the s eal, search t he w ill whose
existence s hall b e a nnounced; and if h e f inds i t, he shall p roceed as s tated above.
Article 504 — O n the d ay a nd a t the t ime indicated, w ithout the n eed f or a ny summons, p ackages found s ealed will
be o pened b y t he P resident of the C ourt o r b y the J ustice o f t he P eace w ith j urisdiction.
extent, this M agistrate will n ote its s tate a nd o rder its d eposit if the c ontent c oncerns a
succession.
Article 505 — I f t he s ealed p ackages appear, by t heir s ubscription or b y s ome other p roof
written, belong t o t hird p arties, t he P resident of the C ourt of F irst I nstance or t he J ustice of t he P eace
extended j urisdiction w ill o rder that these t hird p arties be c alled w ithin a t ime limit that it will set, s o t hat it
may a ttend t he o pening: he w ill d o so on the d ay indicated, i n their p resence or i n their a bsence; and, if the
packages are foreign t o the s uccession, he w ill give t hem to them without making t heir c ontents known, o r
will b e sealed again t o be g iven to t hem at their f irst request.
Article 506 — I f a w ill i s found open, t he J udge s hall note i ts c ondition and observe what i s p rescribed i n Article
502.
Article 507 — I f t he d oors are c losed, if t here a re o bstacles t o the a ffixing of seals, if there
If d ifficulties arise, either b efore o r d uring the s ealing, t he matter w ill b e d ecided in summary proceedings b y t he President of the
Court o r t he J ustice of the P eace w ith e xtended j urisdiction. F or this p urpose, it will b e suspended, a nd e stablished by t he Judge
responsible for a ffixing s eals or t he d elegated c lerk o f the e xternal g arrison, e ven internal, if the


where a ppropriate; a nd h e w ill immediately refer the m atter t o the P resident of the C ourt or to the J ustice of the P eace with
extended j urisdiction.
However, if t here is danger in t he delay, t he Judge m ay rule p rovisionally, s ubject t o subsequently referring the m atter
to t he P resident o f the Court or t he Justice o f the P eace with e xtended jurisdiction.
Article 508 — I n all cases where it i s referred b y t he J udge t o the P resident of the C ourt of First
Instance or t o the Justice o f the Peace with extended j urisdiction, either in m atters of sealing or i n o ther matters,
what will be done and o rdered will b e noted i n t he r eport drawn u p by the J udge; the P resident o r t he J ustice of the
Peace w ith extended j urisdiction will s ign h is orders on said r eport.
Article 509 — W hen t he inventory i s c ompleted, seals may not b e affixed unless
the i nventory i s n ot a ttacked and i t i s n ot so o rdered b y the P resident o f the C ourt or t he J ustice of the P eace
with extended c ompetence.
If the a ffixing o f seals is r equired d uring the inventory, t he s eals will only be affixed to objects not inventoried.
Article 510 — I f t here is no p ersonal p roperty, the J udge w ill draw up a r eport of failure t o act.
If there a re any h ousehold effects t hat are n ecessary for the u se o f the p eople staying i n the h ouse
or on w hich t he seal c annot be p laced, t he Judge w ill make a r eport containing a d escription
summary o f said effects.
Article 511 — I n municipalities where t he population is twenty t housand s ouls a nd a bove, it w ill be required,
at the r egistry of the Court o f First I nstance or t he j ustice of the p eace w ith e xtended or o rdinary jurisdiction, a r egister
of order for s eals, on w hich will be e ntered, according to the d eclaration t hat the
Seal j udges will be r equired t o send t he following w ithin twenty-four h ours o f affixing:
1° The n ames and a ddresses o f the persons on whose belongings the s eal has b een affixed;
2° The n ame and address o f the Judge w ho m ade t he a ffixation;
3° The d ay i t w as m ade.
Article 512 — W hen i t i s n ecessary t o apply the p rovisions of Article 5 o f the d ecree o f September 22, 1887 authorizing
administrators t o affix and r emove seals, even e x officio, the p rovisions of Titles I to V o f this b ook will be observed.
TITLE II
Objections to seals.
Article 513 — O bjections to seals may b e made either by a d eclaration on the s ealing report or b y a w rit s erved o n the
Clerk o f t he Judge.
Article 514 — A ll sealed o ppositions shall c ontain, u nder p enalty of nullity, in a ddition to the f ormalities common to any
writ:
1° Election of domicile in t he municipality or i n t he j urisdiction o f the c ourt where t he s eal is a ffixed, if t he
opponent does not l ive there;
2° The p recise s tatement o f the cause of the o pposition.
TITLE III


On t he lifting of the s eal.
Article 5 15 — S ubject t o d iplomatic conventions w hich m ay e xist when the d eceased i s
foreign n ationality, t he s eal cannot be l ifted and t he i nventory m ade u ntil three d ays later
burial if i t w as a ffixed before, a nd three d ays a fter affixing if i t w as done s ince
burial, under p enalty of n ullity of t he m inutes o f lifting of seals and i nventory, and o f
damages against those w ho have m ade and r equested them; all u nless, f or causes
urgent a nd which will b e mentioned in i ts order, u nless o therwise ordered by the
President of t he C ourt o f F irst I nstance or the J ustice o f the P eace with extended jurisdiction. In t his c ase,
if t he parties w ho a re e ntitled to a ttend t he lifting are not p resent, he will b e called f or them, both
the lifting of t he i nventory, a Notary appointed e x o fficio b y the P resident or t he J ustice o f the P eace with j urisdiction
extent.
Article 5 16 — I f t he h eirs o r s ome of t hem are unemancipated m inors, t he seals will n ot b e lifted u nless they
have b een previously p rovided with g uardians or e mancipated.
Article 5 17 — A ll t hose w ho h ave the r ight to have seals affixed m ay request t hat they be lifted, except
those w ho h ave o nly had them affixed i n execution o f Article 4 95 3 ° a bove.
Article 5 18 — T he formalities for a chieving the l ifting of the s eals will b e:
1° A requisition t o t his e ffect, recorded i n t he m inutes of the S ealing Judge;
2° An o rder f rom the J udge, i ndicating t he d ay a nd t ime when the l ifting will b e carried o ut;
3° A summons to a ttend t his l ifting, made t o the s urviving spouse, the p resumptive heirs, t he
executor of t he w ill, the u niversal legatees and u niversal legatees if t hey are known, and o pponents.
There will b e n o need t o c all interested p arties l iving o utside the s ubdivision of the p lace o f affixing
seals, but a Notary appointed e x officio b y the P resident of the C ourt o f First Instance or t he Justice o f the
Peace w ith extended j urisdiction will b e c alled f or them, at t he t ime of the l ifting and i nventory.
The o pponents will be c alled to their homes by t heir e lected representatives.
Article 5 19 — T he spouse, t he e xecutor of the w ill, the h eirs, t he u niversal legatees and t hose to
universal t itle, m ay attend a ll sessions o f t he l ifting of the s eal a nd t he i nventory, in p erson o r b y an agent.
Opponents may o nly attend, e ither in p erson or b y proxy, t he f irst s ession; t hey will b e required t o be
represented, a t subsequent s essions, by a s ingle proxy for all, on whom t hey agree, o therwise he will b e
appointed e x officio by t he J udge.
If a mong t hese representatives there a re defense l awyers o f the C ourt o f First Instance o f
spring, they will justify their powers, by the representation of the t itle o f their party, a nd t he oldest defense
lawyer following t he o rder o f t he t able of c reditors founded i n a uthentic title,
will a ssist b y r ight for a ll opponents; if n one o f the c reditors is f ounded i n a uthentic title,
the most senior defense l awyer o f t he o pponents founded i n p rivate capacity will a ttend. S eniority will b e
definitively s ettled a t the f irst session.
Article 5 20 — I f o ne of t he o pponents had i nterests different from those of the o thers, or c onflicting
interests, h e m ay a ttend i n p erson, o r b y p rivate r epresentative, at h is o wn expense.
Article 5 21 — O bjections to t he p reservation of their debtor's rights m ay n ot a ttend the f irst s ession, nor
participate in the c hoice of a common representative f or t he other s essions.


Article 522 — The spouse with c ommon property, the heirs, t he executors a nd the
universal legatees or universal legatees may agree o n t he choice of one or two experts; if t hey d o n ot
If they a re n ot suitable, the procedure will b e c arried out, d epending o n the n ature of the o bjects, by o ne or t wo
experts, appointed e x officio by the P resident of the C ourt o f First I nstance o r t he J ustice of the P eace w ith e xtended j urisdiction.
The experts w ill t ake a n o ath before t he Judge who a ppointed t hem.
Article 523 — The lifting report w ill contain:
1° The date;
2° The name, p rofession, residence and election of domicile o f the applicant;
3° The statement o f the order i ssued f or l ifting;
4° The statement o f the summons p rescribed by A rticle 518 above;
5° The a ppearances and s tatements of t he p arties;
6° The appointment of experts w ho must operate;
7° T he recognition of the s eals t hat t hey a re s ound and whole, if t hey a re n ot, t he state of the
alterations, e xcept to provide as appropriate f or r easons of said alterations;
8° The requisitions f or searches, t he results o f said s earches a nd any other r equests o n w hich i t
will be n ecessary t o rule.
Article 524 — The seals w ill b e l ifted successively, and as the inventory is d rawn up, they w ill be r e-affixed
at the e nd of each s ession.
Article 525 — Objects of the s ame nature m ay b e held f or s uccessive inventory in their order; in this case,
they w ill b e p laced under s eal.
Article 526 — If objects and papers are f ound which a re n ot part o f the estate a nd are c laimed by t hird parties,
they w ill be h anded over t o whomever t hey b elong. If t hey c annot b e h anded over i mmediately and it i s n ecessary t o
make a d escription, it w ill b e m ade on t he m inutes of the seals and not on t he inventory.
Article 527 — If the c ause of the affixing o f the seals ceases before they a re l ifted or during the course o f
their lifting, they s hall be l ifted without d escription.
TITLE IV
From the i nventory.
Article 528 — The inventory m ay b e r equested b y those w ho h ave t he right to request the lifting o f the seal.
Article 529 — It must be p resent:
1° of the s urviving spouse;
2° presumptive heirs;
3° of the e xecutor, i f t he will i s known;
4° of the d onees and universal legatees or universal legatees, e ither i n ownership or in usufruct, or
those duly c alled, if they r eside i n t he subdivision; if t hey r eside b eyond,
a s ingle Notary appointed by t he President of the Court o f


First I nstance o r the J ustice of t he P eace with extended jurisdiction t o r epresent t he p arties summoned
and i n default.
Article 530 — I n addition to t he formalities common t o a ll a cts before a N otary, t he i nventory will contain:
1° The n ames, professions and addresses o f t he a pplicants, the a ppearing parties, the d efaulters and
the a bsentees, i f k nown, of t he Notary c alled to represent t hem, a nd o f the e xperts, a nd t he m ention
of t he order a ppointing the N otary for t he a bsentees and t he d efaulters;
2° The indication of the p laces w here t he inventory i s made;
3° The d escription and e stimation o f t he e ffects, w hich will be done at fair value and w ithout flooding;
4° The d esignation o f the q ualities, weight and t itle o f the s ilverware;
5° The d esignation o f species i n cash;
6° The p apers will be l isted b y f irst a nd l ast; they will be initialed b y hand by one o f the
Notaries; if t here are books and r egisters of commerce, t heir condition will be noted, t he p ages will be
similarly numbered and i nitialed i f t hey are n ot; if t here are b lanks in the w ritten pages, they will be
crossed out;
7° T he d eclaration of active a nd p assive s ecurities;
8° The m ention of the o ath taken, a t the t ime of closing t he i nventory, by those w ho were i n possession
of t he objects b efore the i nventory or who lived i n the h ouse in which the s aid objects a re, t hat t hey
have not m isappropriated, seen any misappropriated, nor known that a ny of them had b een misappropriated;
9° The d elivery o f effects a nd p apers, if a pplicable, into t he h ands o f the p erson whose
will be s uitable o r, failing t hat, will b e appointed by the P resident o f the C ourt o r the J ustice o f the P eace
extended competence.
Article 531 — I f, during the i nventory, d ifficulties a rise, o r i f r equisitions are m ade f or
the administration of the c ommunity o r the e state, or f or o ther purposes and, that i t i s not referred t o
by t he other parties, t he p arties will appeal in summary proceedings t o t he P resident o f the C ourt o f First
Instance o r t he Justice of the P eace with e xtended jurisdiction. The P resident w ill enter his o rder o n t he
original of the minutes.
TITLE V
From the s ale of f urniture.
Article 5 32 — W hen t he s ale of furniture b elonging to an estate t akes p lace i n e xecution of Article 8 26 o f the C ivil C ode, this
sale w ill be made in t he f orms prescribed u nder " seizures-executions".
Article 533 - T his will b e d one at the request o f one o f the i nterested parties, by virtue of t he o rder o f the
President o f t he Court of First I nstance or t he j urisdiction a cting therein and b y the b ailiff o r t he e nforcement
agent o r the a uctioneer.
Article 534 — T he p arties entitled to a ttend t he i nventory, and w ho reside or h ave e lected d omicile within a
distance o f five myriameters, shall be c alled; the d ocument shall b e served at the e lected d omicile.
Article 535 — I f d ifficulties arise, a provisional ruling may be made i n summary p roceedings by the P resident
of t he Court o f F irst I nstance o r the J ustice of t he P eace with extended jurisdiction.


Article 5 36 — T he s ale w ill t ake p lace i n the p lace where t he effects a re, u nless otherwise ordered.
Article 5 37 — T he s ale w ill b e m ade b oth i n a bsence a nd presence, without calling a nyone for t he
non-comparers.
Article 5 38 — T he r eport will m ention the a bsence o r p resence of t he applicant.
Article 5 39 — I f all parties a re o f legal a ge, p resent and in a greement, a nd there i s n o i nterested third
party, they w ill n ot b e r equired to c omply with any of t he above f ormalities.
TITLE VI
On t he sale o f real e state belonging to minors.
Article 5 40 — T he s ale o f r eal e state belonging t o m inors m ay o nly be ordered based on a n opinion
from the f amily council stating the n ature o f t he assets and their a pproximate value.
This notice w ill n ot be n ecessary if t he g oods b elong at t he same time t o a dults, a nd if t he s ale is
continued b y t hem.
Article 5 14 — W hen the c ourt approves t his notice and orders the s ale, i t w ill determine the
price o f e ach o f the properties f or sale a nd the c onditions o f the sale. T his reserve price w ill be settled,
either according to the opinion of the f amily c ouncil, or a ccording to the title deeds, o r a ccording to the l eases
authentic o r u nder private s eal w ith a certain date, and, i n t he absence o f l eases, according to t he role o f the
land t ax.
However, t he court may, d epending o n the c ircumstances, o rder a total o r p artial valuation of the b uildings.
This estimate w ill be carried o ut, d epending o n t he s ize and nature of t he a ssets, by one or three experts appointed b y the
Court f or t his purpose.
Article 5 42 — I f the v aluation has been ordered, the e xpert or e xperts, after having t aken a n oath,
either before the President of the C ourt o r b efore a Judge appointed b y him, w ill draw up t heir reports,
which w ill b riefly indicate the b ases o f the v aluation, without going into t he d escriptive detail o f the g oods t o be
sell.
The r eport w ill b e f iled w ith the C ourt Registry. No c opy will be issued.
Article 5 43 — T he a uction will b e o pened after p rior r egistration of t he buildings. T he sale will take
place i n a ccordance with t he provisions of Articles 3 96 e t s eq. o f this Code.
TITLE VII
Shares and auctions.
Article 5 44 — I n t he cases of Articles 823 a nd 838 o f the C ivil Code, w hen t he division m ust b e made
in c ourt, the most diligent party s hall take a ction.
Article 5 45 — B etween t wo a pplicants, the p rosecution s hall belong to t he one who f irst had the
original o f his w rit e ndorsed by t he Clerk of the C ourt; this endorsement s hall b e dated t he day and time.
Article 5 46 — T he s pecial and particular g uardian who must b e given t o each m inor w ith interests will
be appointed according t o the rules c ontained i n t he t itle "opinions of the family c ouncil".


Article 5 47 — The j udgment which will p ronounce o n the r equest for d ivision will appoint, i f n ecessary, a
Judge, i n a ccordance w ith a rticle 823 o f t he Civil C ode, a nd a t t he s ame time a N otary.
If, d uring the course o f o perations, the Judge o r the N otary i s p revented, the P resident o f the C ourt
will p rovide for r eplacement by a n order o n request, which w ill not b e s ubject to o pposition or appeal.
Article 5 48 — In r uling o n t his a pplication, t he C ourt s hall o rder by t he s ame judgment the d ivision, if i t c an
take p lace, or the sale b y auction, w hich shall be made before a m ember of the C ourt.
In t he latter c ase, t he buildings m ust b e previously registered in a ccordance with t he
provisions of Article 1 89 o f the decree of July 2 1, 1 932 ( Article 390 of t his C ode).
The C ourt may, w hether i t o rders the division o r orders t he a uction, declare t hat i t w ill be carried o ut
immediately without prior expertise, even w hen minors are involved; i n t he c ase o f a uction, the C ourt w ill
determine t he starting p rice, i n accordance with A rticle 5 41.
Article 5 49 — When the Court o rders the expert a ppraisal, i t m ay a ppoint one o r three experts, who w ill take
an o ath a s s tated in A rticle 5 42.
The appointments a nd reports o f e xperts will be made in accordance with the f ormalities prescribed u nder the
heading "expert reports".
The e xpert reports will briefly present the b ases of t he v aluation, w ithout going i nto descriptive detail of the
assets t o b e shared o r auctioned.
The p rosecutor will r equest by s ubmissions t he r atification of the r eport.
Article 5 50 — The s ale shall c omply with t he formalities prescribed in t he t itle " on t he s ale o f real estate
belonging to minors", by adding to the specifications:
The n ame, a ddress and p rofession of t he plaintiff, the n ame and a ddress of his defense lawyer;
The n ames, a ddresses a nd professions of t he a pplicants and t heir d efense lawyers, i f t hey have a ny.
Article 5 51 — When the situation o f the buildings r equires several s eparate appraisals, and
each b uilding will h ave been d eclared i ndivisible, there will however be no need for a uction, if i t r esults f rom
the reconciliation of the reports t hat all t he buildings c an b e conveniently shared.
Article 5 52 — If t he request for d ivision only c oncerns t he d ivision of one o r more buildings
on which the rights of the interested parties h ave a lready b een settled, the e xperts, in c arrying out t he e stimate,
will c ompose t he lots as prescribed by a rticle 466 of t he C ivil C ode; a nd, after t heir r eport
has been ratified, the lots will b e drawn, either before t he e xamining magistrate or before t he N otary
already committed by the Tribunal, under Article 5 47.
Article 5 53 — In o ther c ases, and in p articular w hen the C ourt h as o rdered the s haring without
to h ave a n expert report drawn u p, the plaintiff will summon t he c o-sharers t o appear, a t
day indicated, b efore t he appointed N otary, for the p urpose of proceeding w ith t he a ccount, r eport, f ormation o f m ass,
samples, c omposition o f lots and s upplies, a s o rdered by the C ivil C ode, a rticle
828.
The s ame w ill a pply after t he auction h as been c arried o ut, i f t he a uction price m ust be
merged with o ther o bjects into a common mass o f sharing to form the b alance between t he
various lots.
Article 5 54 — The a ppointed N otary w ill p roceed alone and w ithout the a ssistance o f a s econd Notary o r
witnesses; if t he parties a re a ssisted by c ounsel, the f ees o f t hat counsel
will n ot b e i ncluded in t he sharing costs a nd will be their r esponsibility.


In the c ase o f A rticle 8 37 o f t he C ivil Code, the N otary will d raw u p a s eparate r eport o f t he d ifficulties and s tatements o f
the p arties: this report will b e submitted by him to the r egistry and w ill b e r etained t here.
If t he e xamining m agistrate refers t he p arties to the h earing, the i ndication of the d ay o n which t hey must appear will
serve as a n adjournment.
No s ummons w ill b e issued to a ppear before t he Judge, either a t the h earing.
Article 5 55 — W hen t he m ass o f the d ivision, t he r eports a nd d eductions to b e m ade b y e ach o f t he i nterested p arties
have been e stablished by the N otary, in accordance with Articles 829, 830, 831 o f t he C ivil Code,
the l ots will be made by one of t he c o-heirs, if t hey a re all a dults, if they agree on the c hoice, a nd i f
the o ne they have c hosen accepts t he c ommission; otherwise, the N otary, w ithout being
need n o p rocedure, w ill r efer t he p arties before the s upervising j udge, a nd t he l atter will a ppoint a
expert.
Article 5 56 — T he co-heir chosen b y the p arties, o r the e xpert appointed for the f ormation of t he l ots, will e stablish their
composition b y a report which w ill b e received and d rawn up by t he N otary following t he p revious o perations.
Article 5 57 — W hen t he l ots have b een fixed, and the d isputes o ver their f ormation, if there have b een a ny, have b een
judged, t he p laintiff w ill summon t he c o-sharers t o t he e ffect t hat they are p resent, on the d ay i ndicated, a t the N otary's
office, to attend the c losing of h is report, hear i t read, a nd s ign it with him, if t hey can a nd w ish t o do so.
Article 5 58 — T he copy of t he m inutes of t he d ivision will b e g iven b y t he N otary to t he p rosecuting l awyer who w ill
communicate i t to t he l awyers on r equest u pon simple notification
receipt or to t he p arties in his o ffice w ithout travel. I t will n ot b e s erved or filed with the
registry. O n the p rosecution of t he m ost d iligent p arty and t he r eport o f t he s upervising judge, t he C ourt
will a pprove t he d ivision, if n ecessary, the parties p resent or c alled, if n ot a ll h ave a ppeared at
the c losing o f t he m inutes, and on t he c onclusions o f the P ublic Prosecutor, in the e vent that the q uality of the p arties
requires h is m inistry.
If a ll parties agree to a pprove t he l iquidation s tatement, approval can b e g iven.
requested, even b y the g uardians of minors a nd i ncapacitated p ersons and w ithout authorization f rom t he f amily c ouncil
by way o f a collective application. In this case, t he j udgment i s given in chambers a nd i s not s ubject t o a ppeal, u nless
the C ourt has ordered any rectification o f its own motion.
Article 5 59 — T he homologation judgment w ill o rder t he d rawing of lots, either b efore the e xamining magistrate or
before t he N otary, who will i ssue t hem i mmediately after t he d rawing.
Article 5 60 — E ither the Clerk o r t he N otary shall be r equired t o i ssue such e xtracts, i n w hole or i n part, f rom t he m inutes
of division, as t he i nterested parties m ay r equest.
Article 5 61 — T he above f ormalities will b e followed in a uctions a nd d ivisions aimed a t making
cease joint o wnership, when minors o r o ther persons not e njoying their c ivil rights h ave a n i nterest in it.
Article 5 62 - F urthermore, when a ll t he co-owners or c o-heirs a re a dults, enjoying their c ivil rights, present or d uly
represented, they may refrain from legal p roceedings, or a bandon them in any e vent, a nd a gree t o proceed i n such a
manner a s t hey may see f it.
TITLE VIII
From t he i nventory p rofit.
Article 5 63 — I f the h eir w ishes, before t aking up the p osition, and i n accordance with the C ivil Code, t o b e a uthorized to
proceed with the s ale o f m ovable effects dependent on the s uccession, he w ill p resent, for this p urpose


effect, request to t he President of the C ourt of First Instance i n t he jurisdiction o f which t he succession i s opened.
The s ale w ill b e m ade by a p ublic o fficer after t he posters and publications p rescribed a bove for t he sale o f f urniture.
Article 5 64 — If t here i s reason to s ell r eal e state b elonging to t he e state, the b eneficiary h eir shall s ubmit t o t he President
of t he Court o f F irst I nstance o r t o t he J ustice of t he P eace with j urisdiction o ver t he p lace where t he e state is o pened a
request in which t hese real e state p roperties shall b e s ummarily designated. T his r equest shall b e c ommunicated t o t he
public prosecutor; o n t hese conclusions, a j udgment shall b e r endered a uthorizing the s ale and s etting t he s tarting p rice,
or ordering in a dvance that t he r eal e state properties b e v iewed and valued by a n e xpert a ppointed e x officio.
In the latter case, t he e xpert's r eport will b e r atified upon request by t he Court, a nd on the c onclusions of t he p ublic
prosecutor, the C ourt will order the s ale.
Article 5 65 — The s ale will take p lace, i n e ach o f t he cases p rovided f or above, after
prior registration, and f ollowing the f ormalities p rescribed u nder " Sale o f goods"
buildings b elonging t o m inors”.
Article 5 66 — The b eneficiary heir w ill b e d eemed t o b e a pure and simple heir if he h as s old r eal e state w ithout c omplying
with t he rules p rescribed b y t his T itle.
Article 5 67 — If t here i s reason to p roceed w ith the s ale of t he f urniture and income dependent on the
succession, the s ale w ill b e m ade in a ccordance w ith t he f orms p rescribed f or the s ale of t hese types o f g oods,
penalty against the b eneficiary heir of being deemed a p ure a nd s imple h eir.
Article 5 68 — The p rice of t he s ale o f the f urniture w ill be d istributed by c ontribution between the opposing creditors,
following the f ormalities indicated u nder the h eading "Distribution b y c ontribution".
Article 5 69 — The p rice of t he s ale o f real e state w ill be d istributed according t o the o rder of p rivileges and mortgages.
Article 5 70 — The c reditor or o ther interested p arty who w ishes to c ompel the b eneficiary h eir to p rovide security s hall
have h im s erved w ith a s ummons t o t his e ffect by e xtrajudicial act served in person o r a t his domicile.
Article 5 71 — Within three d ays o f this s ummons, i n addition t o one d ay f or every three m yriameters of distance between
the heir's home a nd the m unicipality w here the c ourt sits, h e w ill be r equired to p resent s ecurity t o t he
registry o f the C ourt of the o pening o f the s uccession, i n the f orm prescribed f or the r eceptions o f
deposit.
Article 5 72 — If d ifficulties arise regarding the r eceipt of t he s ecurity, the i nciting creditors w ill be r epresented b y t he m ost
senior defense l awyer.
The f orms p rescribed u nder t he heading "
Accountabilities."
Article 5 73 — Actions to b e b rought b y t he b eneficiary h eir against the s uccession shall b e b rought a gainst the o ther heirs;
and i f t here are n one or t hey are b rought b y a ll, they s hall b e
against a curator for the b enefit of i nventory appointed i n the s ame form as the c urator of t he e state
vacant.
TITLE IX
On t he renunciation o f the c ommunity.


Article 5 74 — R enunciations o f c ommunity or s uccession shall be made a t the registry o f t he Court i n the
jurisdiction of w hich the d issolution o f the community or t he o pening o f t he succession took p lace in the
register p rescribed b y A rticle 784 o f t he Civil Code, a nd i n accordance with A rticle 1 457 o f the s ame Code,
without the n eed for a ny o ther formality.
TITLE X
Vacant e states.
Article 5 75 — I n t he e vent of v acant successions, t he p rocedure is i n accordance with t he amended d ecree
of 27 J anuary 1855 c oncerning t he administration o f v acant s uccessions i n overseas t erritories.
BOOK T HREE.
SINGLE TITLE
Arbitrations.
Article 5 76 — A ll p ersons may c ompromise t he rights o f w hich t hey h ave free d isposal.
Article 5 77 — N o c ompromise may b e m ade o n g ifts and l egacies of f ood, h ousing a nd c lothing; on
separations between h usband and wife, d ivorces, m atters o f s tatus, nor on a ny disputes w hich w ould b e
subject to communication to t he p ublic prosecutor.
Article 5 78 — T he compromise may b e m ade b y report before t he chosen a rbitrators, or b efore a Notary, or
under private s ignature.
Article 579 — The c ompromise shall designate t he objects i n d ispute a nd the names o f t he arbitrators, failing w hich i t s hall b e null and v oid.
Article 5 80 — T he compromise will b e v alid, e ven if it does n ot set a t ime l imit; and, i n this c ase, t he m ission
of the arbitrators will o nly last t hree months, from t he day of t he c ompromise.
Article 5 81 — D uring the a rbitration period, a rbitrators m ay only b e removed b y unanimous consent of t he
parties.
Article 5 82 — T he parties and t he a rbitrators shall follow, in the procedure, the t ime l imits a nd f orms
established f or t he c ourts, unless t he parties h ave otherwise agreed.
Article 5 83 — T he parties may, a t t he t ime o f a nd a fter the compromise, waive t he a ppeal.
When t he a rbitration i s o n a ppeal o r o n c ivil a pplication, t he arbitral j udgment w ill b e final a nd w ithout a ppeal.
Article 5 84 — T he acts o f t he i nvestigation, a nd t he m inutes o f t he m inistry o f the a rbitrators w ill b e made b y
all t he arbitrators, if t he compromise does not authorize t hem to a ppoint one o f them.
Article 5 85 — T he compromise ends:
1° By t he d eath, refusal, removal or i mpediment of one o f the a rbitrators, if there is n o c lause that
he w ill b e o verridden, o r t hat t he r eplacement will b e at the c hoice o f t he p arties or a t the c hoice o f
the r emaining arbitrator(s);
2° By t he e xpiry o f t he stipulated p eriod o r t hat of three months if it has not been s ettled;
3° By s haring i f the a rbitrators do not have the p ower to t ake a third a rbitrator.


Article 5 86 — D eath, w hen t he h eirs are a dults, will n ot t erminate the c ompromise. The t ime limit for i nvestigating a nd
judging will be s uspended during the t ime limit f or t aking i nventory and d eliberating.
Article 5 87 — T he arbitrators may n ot w ithdraw i f their o perations have b egun; t hey may not b e c hallenged except for a
cause arising since t he c ompromise.
Article 5 88 — I f a r egistration o f forgery is f iled, e ven purely civil, or i f any i ncident a rises
criminal, t he a rbitrators will l eave t he p arties to appeal, and t he a rbitration d eadlines will c ontinue t o
run f rom the d ay of judgment o f the i ncident.
Article 5 89 — E ach party s hall be r equired to produce i ts d efenses a nd d ocuments at least fifteen d ays before the e xpiry
of t he compromise; and the a rbitrators shall be r equired to judge o n w hat h as b een produced.
The judgment shall be signed by e ach o f the a rbitrators; a nd i n the e vent t hat t here a re more t han two arbitrators, i f
the minority refused t o sign i t, the o ther arbitrators would mention it, and t he j udgment w ould have the s ame
effect a s i f i t h ad been signed by e ach of the a rbitrators.
An a rbitral judgment s hall not, i n any case, b e subject to opposition.
Article 5 90 — I n the e vent o f a split, t he a rbitrators authorized to appoint a third p arty s hall be r equired to do s o b y t he
decision which pronounces t he s plit; if they c annot a gree, they shall d eclare t his i n the m inutes, a nd t he t hird p arty
appointed by t he P resident o f the C ourt o f First I nstance o r t he J ustice of the P eace with extended j urisdiction w ho m ust
order the execution o f the a rbitral decision.
To t his end, a r equest w ill b e s ubmitted by t he most diligent party.
In b oth c ases, t he d ivided a rbitrators will b e r equired to write t heir separate and r easoned opinion, either in the s ame
minutes or i n separate m inutes.
Article 5 91 — T he third arbitrator s hall be r equired to judge w ithin one m onth o f the d ay o f his a cceptance, unless
this period h as not b een extended b y t he a ct o f appointment; h e m ay only pronounce a fter having c onferred
with the divided a rbitrators, who w ill b e s ummoned t o meet f or t his p urpose.
If a ll t he arbitrators do not m eet, t he t hird a rbitrator s hall decide alone; a nd, nevertheless, h e s hall be b ound t o comply
with one of the o pinions o f the o ther arbitrators.
Article 5 92 — T he arbitrators and third-party a rbitrators shall decide a ccording to the r ules o f law, u nless the c ompromise
gives t hem the p ower to pronounce a s a micable c omposers.
Article 5 93 — T he arbitral judgment s hall be m ade enforceable by a n o rder of the P resident o f the
Court o f F irst Instance or t he j urisdiction acting t herein in the j urisdiction o f which it was r endered;
To this end, t he m inute o f the j udgment w ill be f iled within t hree d ays by o ne of t he a rbitrators at t he r egistry o f t he C ourt.
If h e h ad been c ompromised o n t he a ppeal of a judgment, t he a rbitral d ecision w ill b e f iled with t he r egistry of the C ourt
of A ppeal; and the o rder m ade b y t he P resident o f this C ourt.
Proceedings for filing costs a nd registration f ees may only be b rought a gainst the p arties.
Article 5 94 — A rbitral j udgments, even p reparatory o nes, m ay not b e e nforced,
that a fter t he o rder w hich will b e g ranted, to this e ffect, b y t he P resident o f the C ourt at the b ottom o r i n the m argin
of t he minute, without it b eing n ecessary to communicate it to the p ublic p rosecutor; and t he s aid order will b e
then s ent f rom the d ispatch o f the d ecision.
Knowledge o f the e xecution of the j udgment b elongs t o the C ourt which issued the o rder.


Article 595 — A rbitral judgments m ay n ot, under any c ircumstances, be enforced against t hird parties.
Article 596 — A ppeals against a rbitral judgments shall b e b rought b efore: t he Courts o f First Instance
Instance or j ustice of the p eace with e xtended jurisdiction for m atters which, i f there had been n o
arbitration, would h ave been, either in t he f irst or last r esort, w ithin t he j urisdiction of the Justices of the P eace;
and before t he Court of Appeal f or m atters w hich w ould h ave b een, e ither in f irst or last r esort,
the jurisdiction of the Courts o f First I nstance or of the justices of the peace with e xtended j urisdiction.
Article 597 — T he r ules on t he provisional enforcement of court judgments are applicable to arbitral
judgments.
Article 598 — I f the appeal is d ismissed, t he a ppellant s hall b e sentenced t o the same f ine as i f it were a
judgment of ordinary courts.
Article 599 — A c ivil a pplication m ay be m ade a gainst arbitral judgments, within t he time l imits, f orms and
cases previously d esignated f or j udgments of ordinary c ourts.
It will b e brought b efore t he c ourt which would h ave h ad jurisdiction to hear t he appeal.
Article 600 — H owever, the f ollowing m ay not be proposed for o pening:
1° Failure to observe t he ordinary forms, if the p arties had not otherwise agreed, a s s tated i n
article 5 82;
2° The means r esulting from the f act t hat it will have b een p ronounced o n t hings not requested, except
apply f or a nnulment in a ccordance with t he f ollowing a rticle.
Article 601 — T here shall be n o n eed to appeal o r file a c ivil p etition in t he f ollowing c ases:
1° If the judgment w as r endered w ithout compromise; or outside the t erms of the compromise;
2° If it was o n a n ull or e xpired c ompromise;
3° If it was r endered o nly b y a f ew arbitrators n ot authorized to judge in t he absence of the others;
4° If it was d one b y a t hird p arty without having c onferred w ith t he shared a rbitrators;
5° Finally, if it w as p ronounced on t hings not requested.
In a ll c ases, the parties w ill a ppeal against t he enforcement o rder t o the Court w hich i ssued i t and will
request t he n ullity o f the act described a s an " arbitral j udgment".
An appeal may only b e m ade a gainst c ourt judgments, rendered either on a pplication o r on a ppeal f rom a n
arbitral judgment.
General provisions.
Article 602 — E xcept in c ases w here l aws or decrees p rovide otherwise, t he n ullity of writs o r procedural
acts i s optional f or the J udge who c an always accept o r reject them.
Article 603 — N ull o r f rustrating p rocedures or acts a nd acts w hich h ave g iven r ise t o
a fine, w ill b e i mposed o n the s ubmissions o f the parties o r even e x o fficio
defense lawyers o r m inisterial o fficers who w ill have m ade t hem, who f ollowing t he r equirement o f the
In t his c ase, t hey w ill a lso be l iable for d amages f rom t he p arty and may e ven b e s uspended f rom t heir
duties.


Article 604 — P ublic a uthorities and public e stablishments shall be required t o c omply w ith t he
administrative laws a nd regulations i n force w hen f iling a l egal claim.
Article 605 — The d ay o f n otification a nd t he day of m aturity will n ot be counted for a ll acts.
Where t he l ast day of any procedural time l imit i s a p ublic h oliday, t he t ime l imit s hall be extended
until the next d ay.
Article 606 — S ummons t o attend e xpert reports, as w ell a s s ubpoenas
data p ursuant t o joinder j udgments, w ill only indicate t he p lace, d ay and t ime o f t he
first s ession o r f irst hearing; t hey will n ot n eed to b e repeated, a lthough t he
vacation o r t he hearing w as c ontinued t o a nother day.
Article 607 — W hen i t i s a q uestion of receiving a n oath, a s urety, of p roceeding with a r equest, o f
to a ppoint e xperts and generally to carry o ut any o peration p ursuant t o a j udgment, a nd
that t he parties, or t he J udges may a ppoint a n eighboring court, a J udge o r even a J udge o f
peace, according t o the r equirements of t he c ases; t hey may e ven authorize a T ribunal to a ppoint, either one of its
members, or a J ustice o f the P eace, to carry o ut the o rdered operations.
Article 608 — T he Courts, d epending on the s eriousness of t he c ircumstances, may, in the c ases for w hich they
will b e s eized, issue, e ven ex o fficio, injunctions, delete writings, d eclare t hem
slanderous, a nd order the p rinting of their j udgments.
Article 609 — N o s ervice o r e xecution m ay b e made before s ix o 'clock in the m orning a nd
after six o 'clock in t he evening; n or on legal holidays, unless b y permission o f t he
Judge, i n the event t hat t here is d anger i n t he d elay.
Article 610 — T he defense lawyers who h ave acted in cases where final j udgments h ave been rendered
shall b e r equired to act on t he execution of t hese judgments p rovided that t his t akes p lace within one y ear
of t he pronouncement of the j udgments.
Article 611 — A ll n otifications made t o public p ersons p roposed t o r eceive them w ill b e endorsed b y them
free o f c harge on the original.
In the event o f refusal, the o riginal will b e endorsed by the P ublic Prosecutor at the C ourt o f F irst I nstance.
Instance or t he Justice of the Peace with extended j urisdiction of t heir d omicile. Those r efusing may b e
sentenced, on the conclusions of the public p rosecutor, t o a f ine w hich m ay not b e less t han f ive hundred
francs n or more than f ive thousand f rancs.
Article 612 — A ll a cts and reports o f the J udge's m inistry s hall be made at the p lace where the c ourt sits;
the Judge shall a lways be assisted there b y the C lerk, who s hall keep the m inutes and i ssue t he
dispatches; in case o f emergency, the J udge m ay respond at his r esidence to r equests w hich a re
presented; all except t he e xecution of the provisions contained in the title " summary proceedings".
Article 613 — T his C ode shall be executed three m onths a fter i ts publication i n the O fficial J ournal o f
Cameroon; c onsequently, a ll proceedings b rought since t hat time s hall be conducted i n accordance with
its p rovisions.
This s ame Code will a pply, r egardless of t he d ate o f t he s ummons, to a ll d isputes appealed a fter t he
aforementioned d ate.
All decrees c ontrary t o this Code are repealed, i n particular t hat o f F ebruary 1 , 1 926 a nd t hose w hich
supplemented o r m odified it.
Article 614 — T his o rder shall be registered, published and c ommunicated w herever necessary.



=== finance_law2024_Part2.pdf ===


the c osts of reviewing research p rotocols submitted t o the N ational Ethics
Committee f or Research in H uman H ealth ( CNERSHCE) ;
the costs o f a pproving training courses, p rivate health s tructures and t raining
schools f or health personnel u nder t he r esponsibility o f the M inistry o f Public
Health ( MINSANTE).
3) T he a pproval f ees f or food s upplements a re s et as f ollows:
a) Approval fees f or food supplements:
- A pplication f or a marketing l icence and a uthorization: C FAF 2 50 000 per
product;
- R enewal: C FAF 2 50 0 00 p er p roduct;
- F ine f or failure t o obtain a pproval: CFAF 5 00 000 per p roduct.
b) A pproval c osts for formula m ilk:
- A pplication f or a marketing l icence and a uthorization: C FAF 5 00 000 per
product to b e approved;
- R enewal: C FAF 500 0 00 p er p roduct t o be approved;
Fine f or f ailure to o btain approval: C FAF 1 000 0 00 per p roduct.
4)+h&--Fwees f or exwamining awn applica.tionp for authrorizcation t o. crecate o r mr enew a
private hygiene a nd/or sanitation c ompany are s et as follows:
- L icence fee f or the c reation o f a p rivate hygiene a nd/or s anitation c ompany:
CFAF 250,000;
- L icence t ee f or the c reation o f a private hygiene a nd/or s anitation c ompany:
CFAF 250 0 00
- A pproval f ee f or a surface h ygiene p roduct: CFAF 5 00 000 per p roduct;
- F ees t o renew the a pproval of a surface hygiene p roduct: CFAF 5 00 000;
- F ee for the a pproval o f a personal hygiene p roduct: CFAF 5 00 000;
- F ees t o renew the a pproval of a personal hygiene p roduct: CFAF 5 00 000.
5) T he t ees a nd fines r elating t o t he r eview o f research p rotocols submitted t o the
National E thics C ommittee f or Research in Human Health f or Ethical clearance
are s et a s f ollows:
- C ost o f reviewing a research p rotocol: C FAF 1 0 0 00 to CFAF 2 o oo ooo;
- F ines i mposed f or carrying o ut a r esearch p roject w ithout having obtained
ethical clearance a nd A dministrative R esearch A uthorization o r f or having
misguided t hem to p ursue goals o ther t han g oals s et for obtaining them:
CFAF 1000000 t o CFAF 1 00 0 00 000;
- F ines i mposed f or initiating m edical research w ithout s ubscribing t o an
insurance policy covering a ny r isks that may a rise during t he r esearch:
CFAF 5 0 0 00 0 00 t o C FAF 200 0 00 o o,.. o_:
----ÿÿ:-.:..
PR
AND
56
R L EGISLATI NTAIRE
TUTORY A FFAIR E . O EX
---'~"rlflr?"C TIFtEE SERVICE O RME


- F ines i mposed for c arrying out a m edical r esearch p roject for f ailing t o obtain consent
and failing t o i nform t he p articipant o r f or having their c onsent t hrough f raud a nd
deceit: C FAF 1 0 000 000 t o CFAF 50 0 00 0 00;
- F ines i mposed on whoever, being i nvolved in a m edical r esearch p roject, w he d iscloses
a c onfidential tact without the a uthorization o f the r esearch p roject owner: C FAF 2 0 0 00
to C FAF 100 000;
- F ines imposed on whoever transfers o r acquires a human b ody o r parts thereof for
remuneration or o ther material b enefits: CFAF 5 0 000 t o CFAF 1 000 0 00.
6) Fees f or a pplications f or authorization t o create o r o r o pen a p rivate h ealth f acility o r a p rivate
school for t he t raining of h ealth personnel under t he M inistry i n c harge of health a re s et as
follows:
a) C reation of p rivate health f acilities:
- C ategories A a nd B: C FAF 2 00 000;
- C ategories C a nd D: C FAF 1 00 000;
b) O pening of p rivate h ealth facilities:
- C ategories A and B: C FAF 4 00 000;
- C awtegories C w: C FAF 2 00w 0 00 ; .prc.cm
- C ategory D : C FAF 1 00 000.
c) R egistration fees f or pharmaceutical s tructures:
(cid:127) Licence for wholesalers o f p harmaceutical products:
- l ssuance of l icence: CFAF 5 000 0 00 per entity;
- R enewal of l icence: CFAF 2 000 000 p er entity;
- A ward of the C ertificate of G ood Practice: C FAF 1 0 00 0 00 p er entity;
- R enewal of t he C ertificate of G ood Practice: CFAF 1 0 00 0 00 p er entity.
(cid:127) Licence for p harmaceutical m anufacturing f acilities:
- l ssuance of l icence: CFAF 5 000 0 00 per entity;
- R enewal of l icence: CFAF 2 000 000 per entity;
- A ward of the C ertificate o f G ood Practice: CFAF 2 0 00 0 00 p er entity;
- R enewal of t he C ertificate of G ood Practice: CFAF 2 0 00 0 00 p er entity;
(cid:127) Licence for medical device d istribution structures :
- l ssuance of l icence: CFAF 5 000 0 00 p er entity;
- R enewal of l icence: CFAF 1 000 000 p er entity;
p 57
ENTAl~E
YS~RVIC~


- Award o f the Certificate o f G ood P ractice: CFAF 1 000 000 per entity;
- Renewal o f the Certificate o f G ood Practice: CFAF 1 000 000 per entity;-
(cid:127) Licence f or p romotion a gencies :
- lssuance o f licence: C FAF 5 0 00 000 per entity;
- Renewal o f licence: C FAF 2 000 000 per entity.
d) Approval f ees f or m edical b iology laboratories:
- Licence f or a medical a nalysis laboratory: C FAF 5 000 000;
- Renewal o f licence : C FAF 2 000 000 ;
- Award o f the C ertificate o f Good P ractice : C FAF 2 0 00 000 ;
Renewal o f the Certificate o f G ood P ractice: C FAF 2 000 000.
e) P enalties for n on-compliance w ith the d eadline f or the renewal o f t he
licence o r Certificate of G ood Practice
- L ess t han t hree ( 3) m onths d elay: 25% o f t he renewal f ee ;
- three ( 3) to at l east six ( 6) m onths delay: 5 0% o f t he renewal f ee ;
- t hree ( 3) t o at least nine ( 9) m onths delay: 7 5% o f t he renewal t ee ;
www.prc.cm
- O ver n ine ( 9) m onths delay: 1 00% of t he renewal t ee.
f) Application f or a uthorization t o c reate and o pen a private t raining school
for h ealth personnel: C FAF 300 000 per application.
SECTION T HIRTY-THREE: P rovisions relating to n on-tax revenues f rom t he road
transport s ector.
1) N on-tax r evenues f rom t he transport s ector are m ade up, in p articular, of t he
costs o f issuing o rdinary l icences, special licences and a uthorizations t o
operate i n the r oad transport a nd r oad transport a uxiliary p rofessions.
2) The t ees f or i ssuing road t ransport l icences a re s et as f ollows f or e ach y ear :
- 1st c ategory licence, special l icences 5 2, 53, 57 a nd 5 8: CFAF 10 0 00;
- s pecial l icences 5 4 a nd 5 5: CFAF 15 0 00;
- 2nd, 3 rd, 4 th c ategory l icences, s pecial S 1, S 6, S 9 a nd S 10 licences: C FAF
20 0 00.
3) T he fees f or i ssuing the f ollowing l icences are f ixed at C FAF 100 000:
- V ehicle r entai s ervices;
- u rban t ransport b y motor c ar or bus;
- e xceptional t ransport.
4) T he issuance f ees f or the following p errnits are f ixed at C FAF 150
000: ÿ ÿ;;;:;z..i
PPRES CP"U 58
TGE
... ENTRY
FÿGÿISi:i; ÿ -ÿ , - , A ! - ÿ ÿ, ÿ ,T ÿ .I, ÿ ÿ. ÿ ,.. ! ... . .-.,-,:-:-_-_-, -.-..;.: ,:.-,,~.n,, AND STATUT 0 O £ RY A FFAIR'
X SERVICE
ÿl:D'l'lell!.I!!! .... --(cid:127)(cid:127)-


- c arriage o f d angerous g oods ( hydrocarbons/fuels) b y road throughout t he
national t erritory;
- c arriage o f g eneral cargo b y road throughout t he national territory.
5) T he i ssuance f ees for t he f ollowing a uthorizations a re f ixed at C FAF 2 00 000 :
- c arriage o f g eneral cargo b y road f or personal account;
- c arriage o f d angerous g oods f or p ersonal a ccount;
- t axi passenger transport s ervices operated v ia digital p latforms.
6) The i ssuance fees f or a uthorizations t o m anage t ravel trips in u rban or i nterurban
transport t erminais i s fixed at C FAF 5 0 000.
7) The i ssuance f ees for a uthorizations f or the following road transport a uxiliary
professions are fixed at C FAF 1 00 0 00:
management o f a n urban road t ransport t erminal;
- g rouping o f goods
- e ngaging i n t he r elocation a ctivity.
8) The i ssuance fee for a uthorizations t o m anage a n interurban r oad transport
terminal i s fixed at C FAF 2 00 000.
www.prc.cm
9) The i ssuance t ees for the f ollowing r oad transport a uxiliary professions a re f ixed
at C FAF 5 00,000 :
- m anagement o f a road t ransport t erminal for goods ;
- o rganisation o f c arriage o f g oods b y r oad.
SECTION T HIRTY-FOUR: P rovisions r elating to f ixed fines for traffic offences a nd
road a sset p rotection offences
1) F ixed-rate fines for r oad traffic offences a nd o ffences concerning the p rotection
of r oad a ssets are those p rovided for i n:
- t he P enal Code;
the C riminal P rocedure Code ;
- L aw No. 2 022/7 of 2 5 April 2022 relating t o t he p rotection of r oad a ssets;
- D ecree no. 7 9-341 of 3 September 1 979 a s amended b y Decree n o. 8 6/818
of 3 0 J une 1986 to i nstitute t he Highway C ode.
2) T he a mounts of t he f ines referred to in p aragraph 1 a bove are s et o ut in Appendix
4 of t his c hapter.
SECTION T HIRTY-FIVE: P rovisions r elating to f ines in the maritime sector.
1) F ines in t he m aritime sector are t hose set o ut in O rdinance No. 62-of-30 o f 3 1
March 1 962 to i nstitute the C ameroon M erchant Shipping C ode.
-~----
...... (cid:127)- QJÿ1----, ...ÿ
PRESSURE.CE D E
.... _,_..,,
PRESSURE 59
AND REG
RY ~ FFAIRS C AÿD ICt
IJI ----·-1 M
[];ÿÿÿÿÿEECO AND
r1.uTll.lji;an T DUC: ~ In
.


2) T he a mounts of t he f ines r eferred t o in p aragraph 1 above a re set according to
the s cale i n annex 5 of t his chapter.
SECTION T HIRTY-SIX: P rovisions r elating to fines in t he c ivil aviation s ector.
1) F ines i n t he civil a viation s ector a re t hose p rovided for by L aw N o. 2013/10 of 24
July 2 013 t o l ay down c ivil aviation regulations in C ameroon.
2) The a mounts of t he f ines referred t o in p aragraph 1 above a re set according t o
the scale i n annex 6 of t his c hapter.
SECTION T HIRTY-SEVEN: P rovisions r elating to fines in t he r ailway s ector.
1} F ines i n the r ailway s ector are t hose provided f or b y Law N o. 2023/10 of 25 July 2 023
goveming t he r ailway s ector in C ameroon.
2) T he a mounts of the f ines r eferred t o in p aragraph 1 above s hall b e fixed in accordance
with t he s cale i n A ppendix 7 of this c hapter.
APPENDICES T O CHAPTER THREE
APPENDIX 1 : Environmental f ines
No. Typ w e o f environ w mental o ffenc w e . S p tudy cate r gory c.cm Amount (in C FA F)
Project subject to a n
environmental and social impact 500 000
statement
Obstructing the conduct of a n audit, i nspection Project subject to a n
or monitoring mission on environmental and environmental and social impact 5 0 00 0 00
1 assessment or a summary
social m anagement plans
environmental and social audit
Project subject to a n
environmental and social i mpact
15 000 0 00
assessment or a detailed
environmental and social audit
Project subject to a strategic
30 0 00 0 00
environmental assessment
Project subject to a n
environmental and social impact 30 000 0 00
statement
Project s ubject to an
environmental a nd sociai impact assessment 15 000 0 00
or a s ummary environmental a nd
the F ailure to r estore or r einstate p olluted
2 social audit
or degraded sites
Project subject to a n
environmental and social impact
50 000 0 00
assessment or a detailed
environmental and social audit
Project subject to a strategic 100 0 00 0 00
environmental assessment
3 Leavinq behind waste The 10 000 0 00
4 establishment of i llegal or 2000 0 00
spontaneous .waste dumps
PRESSURES
60
PRE
GISL~llf E THAIRE
ORY A FFAIRS C ~- SERVICE
IFIEE C O RME


No. Type o f e nvironmental o ffence 5 Spillage Study c ategory Amount(in CFAF)
.
of h ydrocarbons o n l and S pillage o f 10 000 0 00
hydrocarbons i n maritime a reas under
6 500 0 00 000
Cameroonian jurisdiction Dumping o f waste
in maritime areas under C ameroonian
7 250 0 00 000
iurisdiction Ballast water d ischarge
in waters u nder Cameroonian j urisdiction
8 50 000 0 00
Project subject t o an
environmental and social i mpact 500 000
statement
Project subject t o an
environmental and social i mpact
3000.000
assessment o r a summary
Odour emissions in e xcess o f t olerated
9 environmental and social a udit
thresholds
Project subject t o an
-
environmental and social i mpact
10 000000
assessment o r a detailed
environmental and social a udit
Project subject t o a strategic
20 000 000
environmental assessment
Project subject t o an
environmental and social i mpact 300 0 00
statement
Project subject t o an
environmental and social i mpact
Failure to s ubmit semi-annual 2000.000
assessment or a summary
monitoring r eports o n e nvironmental a nd s ocial
10 environmental and social a udit
management p lans o ver a period o f one y ear
www.Pproject subrject t oc an .cm
environmental and social i mpact
5 000 0 00
assessment or a detailed
environmental and social a udit
Project subject t o a strategic
10 000 0 00
environmental assessment
Excessive noise a nd o dour pollution in
11 1000 000
residential a nd i ndustrial a reas
Failure to s ubmit s emi-annual waste 12
management r eports over a period of o ne year 2.000. 000
Marketing a nd i mport o f c hemical
substances without p rior a uthorization o r
13 5.000. 000
consent
Possession of prohibited, dangerous a nd/
14 or o bsolete toxic c hemical 5.000 0 00
substances
Transfer o r use of a n environmental p ermit
15 1.000 . 000
belonaina t o a third party
I
APPENDIX 2 A: Wild a nimal s laughter f ees
No. New(CFAF)
Animals
Nationals 1 Residents Tourists 2
1 Elephant 000 0 00 1500 000 500 0 00
2 Giant Eland 3 1000 000 1 1500 000 21500 000
Brain 000 0 00 1500 000 2 500 000
PRESIDENCY .
PRES
TAIR
NDX U SEI:RVICE 1


No.
Animals New(CFAF)
Nationals Residents Tourists
4 Lion 1 000 0 00 1 500 0 00 2 500 000
5 Hippopotamus 6 300 0 00 800 0 00 1 000 0 00
Buffalo 300 0 00 800 0 00 1 000 0 00
7 Damaliscus, 300 0 00 800 0 00 1 0 00 0 00
8 Hippotragus 300 0 00 800 0 00 1 0 00 000
9 Defassa waterbucks 50 0 00 300 0 00 500 0 00
10 Hartebeest 50 0 00 200 0 00 500 000
12 50 0 00 200 0 00 500 000
I will not compose.
13 K ob B uffon 50 0 00 100 0 00 200 000
14 Bushbuck 50 000 100 0 00 200 0 00
15 Bohorreedbuck 50 000 100 0 00 200 000
16 Gazelle 50 000 100 0 00 200 000
17 warthog 50 000 100 0 00 200 000
18 Giant foresthog 50 000 100 0 00 200 0 00
19 B ush pig 50 000 100 0 00 200 0 00
.
29 Yellow-backed duiker 21 50 000 100 0 00 200 0 00
Bay diver 20 000 50 000 100 0 00
22 Peters's diver 20 0 00 50 000 100 000
23 Blue diver 20 000 50 000 100 0 00
24 G rimm's D iver 20 000 50 000 100 0 00
25 R ed-flanked duiker 20 000 50 000 100 0 00
26 Other d ivers 20 000 50 000 100 000
27 The Drwill ww.pr20c 000 .c50 0m00 100 000
28 Baboon 20 000 50 000 100 000
29 T he P atas ( monkey) 30 10 000 30 0 00 50 000
10 000 30 000 50 000
The Vervet (monkey) 31
The Civet 10 000 60 000 100 000
32 Porcupine 10 0 00 20 000 30 000
10 0 00 20 000 30 000
33 Brush-tailedporcupine
34 T he Grasscutter 10 000 20 000 30 0 00
10 000 80 000 100 000
35 Python
36 G aboonviper 10 000 20 000 30 000
37 The Nile monitor 10 000 30 000 50 000
38 Crocodile 20 000 50 0 00 100 000
39 Great Hornbill 5 000 10 000 20 000
40 Little H ornbill 41 5000 10 0 00 20 000
Other B irds 5 000 10 000 2 000
APPENDIX 2 B: T axes for t he capture and d etention o f w ild animais
New(CFAF)
No. Animals
Detention Commercial a nd scientific e xports
Birds
1 Other b irds 1 000 2 000
Reptiles
10 000 15 000
Python
1 2 Nile crocodile 20 0 00 40 000
3 Monitor lizards 10 000 15 000
4 Other c rocodiles 15 0 00 30 0 00
5 Other r eptiles 5 000 10 0 00
PRl:SiOl:NC AND
PRE SIOENCY 62
--ÿ-
EGISL ATIHTER
Y AFFAIRS CARO t
~~~~~~:eR I F IEE C ON


Amphibians
Goliath frogs 10 000 20 0 00
2 Other amphibians 2 0 00 5000
3 Gastropods / m olluscs / shellfish 5 0 00/kg 10 0 00/kg
APPENDIX 3: Rates for r evenues from the Y outh A ffairs a nd C ivic Education
sector
Table 1: Locally m ade c anopies and tents
DAILY FLAT RATES FOR DAIL Y FLAT RATES F OR
DAIL Y FLAT RA T ES FOR
No. DESCRIPTION ADMINISTRA T ION,SPROJECTS A SSOCIATIONS AND Y OUTH A ND
INDIVIDUALS
PROGR.ÿMMES MOVEME.. NTS
1 Tent f or 1 00 p eople 5x8
13 5 0( 13 ooc 10 ooc
m
2 Canopy for 6 0 people 5 x5m
10 o oc 7000 6 s oc
3 Canopy for 4 0 people 4 x4m '
9 50( 6 5 00 6 0 00
4 Canopy for 2 0 people 3x3m
9 ooc 6 ooc 5 o oc
Table 2 : l mported c anopies
DAIL Y F LAT RATES DAIL Y FLAT R ATES FOR
wwDAILw Y FLAT RATES F .OR prc.cm
No. DESCRIPTION FOR ADMINISTRATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS A ND
INDIVIDUALS
PROJECTS AND P ROGRAMMES YOUTH M OVEMENTS
1 Canopy f or 6 0 p eople 5x5m 25 0 00 20 0 00 15 0 00
2 Canopy for 4 0 p eople 4 x4m 20 0 00 15 0 00 10 000
3 Canopy for 2 0 people 3 x3m 15 0 00 10 0 00 7 0 00
Table 3: Chairs, m obile t oilets a nd p odium v ehicles
No (cid:127) _.- DESCRIPTION' ·· : D AILY R ATES..
. . _
Plastic c hairs 90
1
2 Adjustable chairs 700
3 Mobile t oilets 15000
4 Podium o f 200 000
.
APPENDIX 4 : Fixed fines f or r oad t raffic offences and o ffences a gainst the p rotection o f road assets
- bÿ p_iid (in
1 N on-compliance w ith t he rules of convoys 2 lllegal
overtaking 2400
3 U ncontrolled m ovement o f livestock 2400
4 D angerous opening of doors 2400
..(cid:127)(cid:127).
CHAIRMAN OE LA R f'PuA.1 1 n111: i :i&IIM'ftr?
r;
PRESSURE r-uu 63
IF E TR
AND
AIRS RVICE
CAR eco RME
Yes~


No. (cid:127) C . . . .',, " ÿ ... ' . .. ' ." . - ' -... : .. He ; a ding. .. . . . . ,. (cid:127) > . . - .· ; . _,. f .(cid:127)· · : ; . . A · m · ' o . . _ u n . t tQ ,.,, : b e p C i . j F id A ÿ F ( i ) n . . , . : , .
Stopping o n the road w ithout a s ignal, abandoning a v ehicle or a nimais o n the pavement
5 3600
6 Non-compliance w ith s afety d istance between t wo v ehicles 3600
7 Non-compliance w ith d istance r equirements b etween parked vehicles 3600
8 Faulty lights, failure to comply with t raffic l ight s ignais 3600
9 Sudden braking, i neffective b rakes 3600
10 Absence of n umber p late 3600
11 Fautty h orn, excessively loud horn 3600
12 Unsignalled obstruction on the road 3600
13 Failure to respect a p edestrian crossing 3600
Failure to place s ignais i n the event o f an a ccident, failure t o display i ntentions (flashing l ights)
14 3600
15 Wrong p arking, p arking o n a b ridge, parking n ear a l evel crossing 3600
16 Failure t o respect the right o f way o n a f erry 3 600
17 Left-hand d riving 25 000
18 Wrong t urn 25000
19 · U -turn m ade w ithout any s ignal 25000
20 Wrong o vertaking 25000
21 Lack o f fire e xtinguisher 25 0 00
22 Drunk d riving 25000
23 lnability to contrai the vehicle 25000
24 Obstruction of railway l ines - 25 0 00
25 Failurew t o produce t hwe driving l icencwe, absence o f l i.cencep rc.cm 2 5 0 00
26 Careless crossing of the road 25000
27 Failure to comply with t he maximum a uthorized mass 25000
Failure to comply with t he authorized loads and measurements o n a b ridge o r f erry
28 25 000
29 Refusai t o c omply 25000
30 Damage t o o bjects used as r oad s igns 25000
31 Failure t o obey road s igns 25 0 00
32 Entry i nto a p arking s pace w ithout any signal 25 0 00
Over s peeding, exceeding t he speed l imit, inability t o c ontrol the vehicle, abnormally low s peed
33 25000
on motorways
34 Faulty manufacturer's p late 2400
35 Helmet n ot f itted but worn 3600
36 Failure t o wear t he seat b elt 3600
37 Lack o f spanners for b reakdown s ervices 3600
38 Confusion o n the road 3600
39 Non-functional w indscreen wipers 3600
40 Absence of number p late 3600
41 Hom, faulty horn, e xcessively loud h orn 3600
42 Reverse n ot i ndicated 3600
Faulty motor0lke neacrngnts, f autty motorbike h oms 3600
43
44 No white sign 3600
45 Passengers transport .. e d in insecure conditions '\ 3600
46 No first-aid k it 3600
47 Failure to specify m aximum authorized mass 3600
48 Failure to provide advance s ignals 3600
49 Lack o f spare tyre, worn tyre 3600
50 Lack of spanners for b reakdown services 3600
~
.. ÿ ÿ (cid:127)- ' 1r
PRESIDENCY O F T HE R EC1'"' . .l
ÿ l ~ --(cid:127)ÿ64 TO INDICATE
RESTRICTIONS A ND S UPPLEMENTARY · E FFECTS C A1 0
'
INOE1. S ERVICE I
- -
ÿ - ":..---(cid:127)ÿ(cid:127)91!! ....
ÿ - - .r .. :: c t::K I I FIEE C OÿORME TDIIIC t "\DV


No; . . . .' . . . .. _.,. '. t :·- .. - Hea . d ing ,· .. . .,,- :·,· .. , ·(cid:127) ~· - ,. . . ·_ . (cid:127)· A r . n (cid:127) ou ., nt · C .. F t o A b F e . ) P J ÿ ! - . · d · . ( in . ;
51 Faulty speedometer 3600
52 Non transpaCr ent w indow 3600
53 No r ear-view mirror at all 3600
54 Noxious gas e mission 3600
55 Poorly packed luggage 25000
56 Failure t o g ive t ickets t o p assengers 25000
57 Lack of t axi d river's c redentials 25000
58 No r egistration c ard, f ailure to p resent a vehicle r egistration document, e xpired registration certificate 25000
59 Loading beyond the e xternat contour o f t he v ehicle 25000
60 No fire e xtinguisher 25000 2 5
61 Faulty reverse gear 000
62 No h elmet (absence h elmet) 25000
6 3 No w indscreen 25000 2 5
64 Fake vehicle d ocuments 000 2 5
6 5 Non-compliance with a uthorized weight 000
66 Faulty exhaust pipe 25000 25
6 7 Lack of r oad w orthiness certificate 000
APPENDIX 5 : F ines i n the maritime sector
www.prc.cm
No::· · H .eading ·:. ~ : : · _ ; .: · ·: ' ., . . 1 · ,. . , _ ÿ . . - .. ÿ'. ~ ... _Arn01J. n t to' be·paip. Q J.n CF' AF) ' .. ., . . . ' ·-
For o fficers: 1 000 to 50 0 00 CFAF For m asters
1 Offences against s hip r ules and regutations and c rew members: a fine o f between 500 CFAF and 2 5 0 00 CFAF
5 000 to 50 0 00 CFAF 18 0 00 to 180
1 Unauthorized a bsence and abandonment o f p ost 000 CFAF
2 The c aptain's r ole when e ntering and leaving ports
9 000 to 90 0 00 CFAF 18 0 00
'
Abuse of a uthority, c ontempt a nd assault of a subordinate
3 to 180 000 CFAF in t he case o f the s hip's c aptain 9 000 fo 90
000
4 Failure t o f ulfil t he c aptain's r esponsibilities CFAF; 1 8 0 00 to 360 000 CF
5 Usurpation of c oomand AF 9 000 to 90 0 00 CFAF;
6 Conte (cid:127) m pt t owards a superior . '
Failure t o c omply with o rders f rom t he authority r esponsible f or
7 9 000 to 90 0 00 CFAF
'
maritime s ecurity
Refusai b y t he c aptain t o t ake charge of a n i nvestigation o r t o
8 18 0 00 to 360 000 CFAF
transport an a ccused persan
9 Abandoning an i njured o r sick p ersan ashore 9 000 to 180 000 CFAF
Non-compliance with t he r equirements on work, f eeding a nd
10 18 0 00 to 180 000 CFAF
sleeping at s ea l nfringement o f t he
11 rules o n n avigation 18 0 00 to 180 000 CFAF
Gross t onnage tess t han 25 t onnes : 9 000 to 36
000 C FA f rancs;
12 Unauthorized navigation
Gross t onnage o ver 25 t onnes : 3 6 0 00 to 90 0 00
CFAF
Gross t onnage less t han 25 t onnes : 3 000 t9 9 000
13 Breaches o f r egulations on the c rew l ist
CFAF;
'
PRESIDENCY OF
PRESSURES
65
SE


No . H eading. ' .. ' ' Amount to be p aid ( in CFAF). : . J (cid:127)-
Gross tonnage o ver 2 5 tonnes : 9 000 to 5 4 000 CFAF
14 Breaches o f navigation s afety regulations 50 000 to 1 0 00 000 CFAF 3 0 00
15 Shore access and clandestine b oarding to 180 000 CFAF 3 0 00 to 90
16 Clandestine loading o f g oods 000 CFAF
17 No crew list approval 3 0 00 to 54 0 00 CFAF
18 External identity marks 10 0 00 to 180 000 CFAF
19 Collision 1 0 0 00 t o 3 00 0 00 C F A F
20 Stranding d ue t o n egligence 10 000 t o 3 00 0 00 C F A F
21 Negligence on t he part of t he captain after a collision 30 0 00 to 600 000 CFAF
Offences relating to t he general o rganisation o f t ransport
22 100 000 f t o 1 0 00 000 CFAF
Fishing i n t he s hip m anoeuvring a rea or in t he c hannel
23 50,000 to 4,000,000 CFAF
Detention of goods i n the port a rea w ithout p roof o f origin
24 100,000 t o 1,000,000 CFAF
Refusai b y t he captain t o comply with t he port m aster's
24 100 000 to 3 0 00 000 CFAF
orders
25 lmproper m ooring of a vessel 300 000 to 1 0 00 000 CFAF 500
26 Non-compliance with a n order t o s et sail 000 to 5 0 00 000 CFAF
27 Pollution o f the p ort a rea 3 0 00 000 to 10 000 000 f
www.prc.cm
APPENDIX 6: Fines i n the c ivil aviation s ector
Noi 6-~ .. - --"(cid:127):.,>~ _ < ,· . - ., . <: ·- _ ,'< . , _ ;, - - , -~ . " , _ -·- ' ·.' -Heading~_,·, .. ,. ' (cid:127)",,,,_._... , ,, , -- - ·;. - (cid:127)' ~- " . , E"' · . Amoùnt to bepaid
Commissioning a n aircraft w ithout a r egistration certificate and a irworthiness d ocuments when r equired.
1
Placing or leaving aircraft i n service w ithout the identification m arks provided for i n S ection 21.
2
Putting or leaving in circulation, an aircraft w hose a irworthiness d ocuments or n uisance limitation
3
certificate h ave ceasea ta be valid.
"- 15 0 00 000 frs t o 20
Putting or leaving in circulation a n a ircraft which, at a ll times, d oes not meet the t echnical conditions o f
000 000 frs
4 airworthiness used as b asis f or issuing the airworthiness d ocument, o r t he c onditions t o ensure that
such a document r emains vaDd P lacing or l eaving i n c irculation a n a ircraft under conditions
of use which do n ot c omply w ith t he safety r ules l aid down b y t he p resent law o r i ts i mplementing
instruments r elating to a ircraft equipment, m ethods of their use, the c omposition of crews a nd t heir
5
conditions o f employment.
Operating or participating i n the operation of a n aircraft w ithout a v alid p ermit o r d ocument r equired b y
6
the regulations i n force.
15 0 00 000 frs t o 20
7 Destruction or falsification o f o ne o f t he aircraft d ocuments provided for in t his l aw.
000 000 frs
Operating or participating in the operation of a n aircraft under the c onditions s et out in S ection 58 o f
8
this law.
9 Flying an a ircraft without p ossessing a n appropriate l icence.
25 000 000 frs t o
10 Destruction or falsification o f o ne o f t he aircraft documents provided for i n t his l aw. 50 0 00 000 f rs
11 Consciously flying an aircraft under t he conditions s et out in S ection 1 35 of this l aw.
Destruction, misappropriation or a ttempted d estruction or m isappropriation o f an a ircraft or s pare parts 6 0 00 000 frs t o 2 0
12 to the d etriment o f a mortgagee, p referential creditor or
000 000 f rs
distrainor.
66
EPU IC E .
1
F R EGULATORY RY
,
~~ (cid:127) AFFAIRS C A O l ~DEX S ERVICE
~.-------~__
CERTIFIED C OPY C C N.FORM1;


..
No. Heading , .. (cid:127). ' · Amount to bepaid
Affixing or c ausing to b e a ffixed t o a n a ircraft registration TTlarks which do not c ÿnform t o those on
25 0000 000 frs to 5 0
13
the registration c ertiticate, w hich r emove or cause t o be r emoved, render or c ause to be r endered
000 000 frs
illegible m arks w hich h ave b een accurately a ffixed.
Failure to keep any o f t he a ircraft d ocuments f or five ( 5) years from t he last r egistration. 1 000 000 frs t o 5
13
000 000
Whoever, on b oard an a ircraft i n flight, d eliberately throws a n o bject likely to cause harm to persans 1 O 0 00 000 frs t o
14
or p roperty o n the g round. 25 000 000 frs
The p ilot in command of a n a ircraft w ho, k nowing t hat his a ircraft has j ust caused o r w as at t he origin
15 000 000 frs t o 2 0
15 of accident on the g round, f ails t o immediately i nform t he authorities of the nearest airport w ith which
000 000 frs
he can communicate.
Failure by an operator o r owner t o t ake o ut a n insurance p olicy f or his/her a ircraft before it i s put i nto 25 000 000 frs t o 5 0
16
use Failure to take out a 000 000 frs 50
"Civil Liability and "Global D amages" i nsurance p olicy t o cover t he risks of managing a n a ircraft. 000 000 frs t o 100
17
000 000 frs
Any aircraft operator whose c rew h as i nfringed o ne of the air t raffic rules i n f light o r o n the ground, 25 000 000 frs t o 5 00
18
during manoeuvres prior to t ake-off or f ollowing l anding. 000 000 frs
19 Creation of a n airfield w ithout a uthorization
1 000 000 frs t o 5
Unauthorized opening o r operation o f an airfield, a m aintenance organisation, a t raining
20 000 000 frs
organisation, a n aero c lub or any o ther a eronautical c ompany.
Over f light o f the Cameroonian airspace in v iolation o f the provisions o f Section 59 of this law by t he
21 25 000 000 frs t o 1 25
operator o f an aircraft o f f oreign nationality.
000 000 frs
22 Over f light o f a p rohibited a rea by a n a ircraft o perato.r.
Seing o n b oard an a ircraft i n f light without being able to justify one's presence b y a regular t icket o r
23
by the a ssent of t he o perator o r captain. 1 00 000 frs t o
www.prc.cm
Non-compliance or refusai t o c omply w ith the captain's i nstructions regarding t he safety o f the 500 000 f rs
24
aircraft or t hat of p ersans onboard.
Refusai by a pilot t o c omply w ith t he i njunctions of t he competent authorities, a nd overflies a n à rea 500 000 frs to
25
or j :>art of the territory d eclared to b e u nder a state o f siege. 2 000 000 f rs
26 Using on b oard an aircraft o f objects or equipment p rohibited f or carriage. 1 00 0 00 frs to U sing p hotographie or
27 cinematographic equipment o ver a prohibited area. 500 000 frs lnstalling or u sing a device f raudulently installed w ithin or
in the v icinity of a n airport 5 000 0 00 frs to of such a nature as t o c ompromise a ir n avigation s afety. 2 5 0 00 000 frs Failure
28
by the Pilot-in-Command t o keep any of the logbooks o r m aking inaccurate 3 000 0 00 frs to 1 0 e ntries therein. 0 00 000 f rs
Failure by the opèrator o f an aircraft t o maintain t he aircraft, on-board a nd o ther equipment n ecessary to e nsure safe
29
operations.
25 000 000 frs t o 1 00
30
000 000 frs
31 Landing o utside a n a irfield without l egitimate cause.
2 000 000 frs to 5
Landing d uring a n i nternational flight at an a irfield not o pen to international s ervice without l egitimate
32 000 000 frs
reason.
Whoever, c arrying o ut a job f or which a licence is required, is caught a t t heir workstation in f lagrante
10 000 000 frs t o 2 5
33
delicto i n a state o f d runkenness or under the e ffect of a psychoactive or p sychotropic substance.
000 000 frs
A captain who e ngages a f light w ithout ensuring that all t he required s afety conditions are m et 10 000 000 frs t o 2 5
34
Employing 000 000 frs 1 5
a m ember of the f light c rew or any other aeronautical p ersonnel who d oes n ot m eet t he required 000 000 frs t o
35
qualification conditions R efusai to c arry o ut the 25 000 000 frs
instructions of air t raffic c ontrai s ervices, without l egitimate 5 000 000 frs to 1 0
36
reason 000 000 frs
Without p rior a uthorization, m aking low-level f lights or p erforming manoeuvres that c onstitute public
37
shows. 2 000 000 frs to 5
000 000 frs
An acrobatie or aerobatic f light i nvolving perilous and u nnecessary m anoeuvres o ver urban a reas.
38
PRESIDENCY O E LA R E:ÿ!7-la-u , .. AND -
67
. PRESIDENCV OF T H<
SERV LEGISLATION AND p..tE\ÿÿ1
REGULATIONS (cid:127)T(cid:127)ÿfÿIRSURO
ÿ-r-nPIE CERTIFleÿe s E ÿÿr.H"" ÿ c !.-.ÿ. ÿ "" E "1(l GENERAl.


Noÿ ,_ ' ' Heading . ' .ÿ ' :.-. . Amount t o b epaid ;
Whoever e ngages a flight in v iolation of t he rules a pplicable to such f light. 5000 000 frs to 1 0
39
000 000 frs
Refusai to a ssist i n s earch and rescue o perations f or victims of an a ir disaster, w ithout l egitimate 1 0 00 0 00 f rs t o
40
reason. 50 0 00 0 00 f rs
Keeping a n aeronautical worker on d uty b eyond the d uration f ixed by r egulations. 5000 000 f rs t o 100
41
000 0 00 f rs
Without l egitimate r eason, refusing t o c omply with a s ummons f rom safety inspectors o r s ecurity 1 0 0 0 00 f rs t o
42
inspectors. 500 0 00 f rs
Refusai to c ommunicate t o the a uthorities r esponsible f or investigation, t he r ecordings, m aterials, o r
43
any other document e nabling them t o carry o ut their m ission.
1 0 00 0 00 f rs t o 5
Refusai to t ransmit s tatistical and f inancial information or a ny o ther i nformation r elating t o an a ir
44
000 0 00 f rs
transport activity to t he competent a uthority.
Obstructing t he performance of t he duties of a special judicial police officer o r a p olice officer w ith
45
general jurisdiction d uring a criminal investigation relating t o civil aviation.
Removal, c oncealment or retention of a ll o r part o f an a ircraft involved i n an a ccident o r i ncident, o r 2 0 00 0 00 f rs to 1 o
46
claimimg o wnership of a ny property t hat was o n b oard t hat aircraft. 000 0 00 f rs 1 0 00
.
Alte ring the state of t he site o f a civil a viation accident o r i ncident. 000 frs t o
47
5 0 00 0 00 f rs
Assault, physical threats or verbal threats against flight p ersonnel i n the p erformance o f their d uties. 200 0 00 f rs to 2
48
000 0 00 frs 2 00
Failure to c omply w ith the ban o n smoking in t oilets or e lsewhere in the a ircraft, o r s moking i n the s aid 000 f rs to 5 00
49
areas. 000 f rs 5 0 00
Damaging a s moke detector or a ny o ther safety d evice installed o n board the a ircraft. 000 f rs t o 10 000
50
000 f rs 500 0 00
www.prc.cm
Unlawful use o r possession o f a portable e lectronic device o r a ny o ther o bject on b oard an a ircraft. frs to 2 0 00 0 00
51
frs
A m anager o f a public a ir t ransport c ompany w ho discriminates with r espect t o public access to its
52
transport services.
The operator o f a public t ransport company w ho faits t o comply w ith t he o bligations laid d own i n its
53
licence or operating a uthorization. 3 0 00 0 00 f rs t o 30
The operator o f a public t ransport company w ho disregards t he r outes i ndicated in his/her l icence or 000 0 00 f rs
operating authorization o r who f ails to c omply with the t ares, f requencies o r s chedules approved or
54
endorsed by the competent authorities o r r egistered w ith t he l atter.
An o perator o f a n i rregular public air t ransport c ompany that announces r egular flight schedules and
itineraries or announces flights according t o a certain frequency, o r t hat periodically c arries out f lights 2 0 00 0 00 f rs t o
55
on certain days of t he week with s uch frequency t hat they a re a ssimilated t o a s eries of regular flights. 1 O 0 00 0 00 frs
.
Installation or use w ithin t he p erimeters a nd in t he vicinity of an a irport, without p rior authorization, o f 25 0 00 0 00 f rs to 100
56
any d evice likely t o c ompromise air n avigation s afety. 000 0 00 f rs
Entering o r staying without authorization i n l and a nd areas p rohibited under the g eneral r egulations
57
and i nstructions o f a irfields assigned to a public service. 1 0 0 0 00 f rs t o
500 0 00 frs
Leaving l ivestock o r d raft, l oad-bearing o r m ount animais in the same spaces a nd a reas.
58
Obstructing b y a ny means w hatsoever and for a ny reason whÿtsoever a r unway, strip, a r oad, an a rea 1 0 0 0 00 f rs t o 1
59
000 0 00 frs 2
or adjoining c learance.
Obstructing b y a ny means w hatsoever and f or any r eason whatsoever a r unway, strip, a r oad, an a rea 000 0 00 f rs t o 5 0 00
60
or adjoining c learance. 000 f rs 5 00 0 00
frs to 5 0 00 0 00
Whoever d eteriorates a n a irfield o r the v arious adjoining tracks, o r e rects o n t he a reas, works of such
61
a n ature a s to c ompromise t he s afety o f a ir t raffic. frs
PRESIDENCY OF T HE REPUBLIC
PRESIDENT
68
IRE
ICE
ME
py


APPENDIX 7: Fines i n the railway sector
No. Heading ·_ .· ..:.·: . . , . ,:,.(cid:127) , .,... \ . ,· . . - . - · - . - . - --- ' · . ' , ;(cid:127) _ -, . . ÿ - -- . .,_ '. . A_mount t o b epaid
Placing or leaving in service rolling stock t hat h as not o btained a certificate of r egistration
1
and a n a uthorization for use.
Placing or l eaving in service r olling stock that h as n ot u ndergone the c odification procedure p rovided
2
for i n Section 83 of this l aw.
3 Putting or l eaving in circulation r olling stock for which the a uthorization i s n ot valid.
15 000 0 00 f rs to 2 0 0 00
Putting or a llowing r olling s tock to be p ut into circulation that does not comply w ith the t echnical
000 f rs
conditions of m ovement that s erved as the b asis f or issuing t he a uthorization t o p ut the r olling stock
4
into u se or w ith t he rules t o maintain t he validity o f s uch a d ocument.
Putting or a llowing r olling s tock to b e p ut into use u nder conditions t hat do not comply w ith the s afety
5 rules laid down by t his l aw or its i mplementing texts relating to t he e quipment o f trains, the p rocedures
for t heir u se and t heir conditions o f operation.
Driving or p articipating in driving a train without a valid title o r document r equired by t he r egulations
6
in force. 5 0 00 0 00 f rs to
Destruction, falsification, e ntering inaccurate i nformation or failing to complete the t raction sheet. 1 O 0 00 0 00 f rs
7
Affixing to r olling stock registration information that is inconsistent w ith the r egistration c ertificate, 25 000 0 00 f rs to
8
deleting o r b lurring t he marks t hat h ave been a ccurately a ffixed. 50 0 00 0 00 f rs
Failure by the owner or lessee, duly recorded i n t he railway r egister, t o keep d ocuments relating to 1 0 00 0 00 f rs to 5 0 00 0 00
9
rolling w stock for 5 yeawrs from the laswt entry. .prc.cm frs
Deliberately throwing (while o n b oard a moving t rain) a ny object likely to c ause harm t o p ersans or 100 0 00 f rs to
10
property o n railway property. 1 o oo 0 00 f rs
Deliberately throwing (while i nside o r outside r ailway premises) any object likely to c ause harm t o 100 0 00 f rs to
11
persons o r p roperty o n r ailway premises. 1 0 00 0 00 f rs
12 Failure b y the driver o r his assistant to r eport an a ccident recently caused or provoked.
5 0 00 0 00 f rs to 1 0 000
Unjustified r efusai to stop at t he station nearest t o the s cene of t he a ccident, w hich c ould compromise 000 f rs
13
passenger s afety.
Failure to s ubscribe to an a ppropriate i nsurance p olicy for one's r olling s tock i t is put t o use.
14
25 0 00 0 00 f rs to
50 000 0 00 f rs
15 Failure to s ubscribe to a professional risk i nsurance p olicy f or one's s taff.
Failure to s ubscribe to a "Civil L iability" and " Global Damage" i nsurance policy t o cover t he o perator's 50 0 00 0 00 f rs to 1 00 0 00
16
management risk. 000 f rs 10 000
Failure to s ubscribe to the insurance policy c onstitutes professional m isconduct attributable t o t he 000 f rs to 20
17
Manager o f t he operating company. 000 0 00 f rs
, J
500 0 00 f rs to 1 00 0 00 0 00
18 lnfringement of r ail t raffic r ules b y t he driver and a ssistant.
frs
5 0 00 0 00 f rs to 25 0 00 0 00
19 Unauthorized creation and o pening o f a training c entre for rail transport t rades.
frs
20 Presence n ot b acked by a valid ticket or not a pproved by t he o perator.
25 000 f rs to 1 00 0 00 f rs
Refusai to o bey the instructions of o fficera of t he special r ailway p olice o fficers, c oncerning t he s afety
21
of t he train o r t hat o f the peraons carried.
"
Refusai b y the train d river to c omply with o rders from the c ompetent a uthorities t o leave a p rohibited 2 0 00 0 00 \ frs t o 10 000
22
area. 000 f rs
PRESIDENCE OF T HE R EPU88f.40Vÿ
PRESIDENT
69
AND
ICE
ME
n T DII
.,.ÿ


.
No. Hea ... d (cid:127) ing .. (cid:127) . . . . .. . . . _Amoùnt to ÿe ? paid
100 0 00 frs t o 500 000
23 Use o n board a train o f objects o r devices w hose c arriage is p rohibited.
frs 2 5
Fraudulent i nstallation or use o f a d evice i nside or i n t he v icinity of a t rain s tation likely t o c ompromise 000 0 00 f rs t o 100 0 00
24
the s afety of rail t ransport. 000 f rs
Failure by t he r ailway operator to m aintain the r olling stoék o r infrastructure o perated to e nsure s afe 25 0 00 000 frs to 2 50 0 00
25
operation. 000 frs
Performing a technical j ob f or which a c ertificate of p rofessional aptitude is r equired, white under the 10 000 000 frs to 25 0 00
26
influence o f alcohol o r a psychoactive or psychotropic substance. 000
10 0 00 000 frs to 25 0 00
27 Driving without ensuring t he r equired safety c onditions.
000 frs
Recruiting a member o f the technical s taff assigned to t rain d riving or safety d uties w ho d oes n ot m eet 15 0 00 000 frs to 25 0 00
28
the r equired q ualifications. 000 frs
Refusai t o carry out t he i nstructions of r ail traffic management services w ithout a l egitimate r eason. · 5 0 00 000 frs to 1 0 000
29
000 frs 1 0 0
' . 000 frs to 1 0 00 000 frs 50
30 Refusai t o assist in search and rescue operations for v ictims of a r ail d isaster.
000 000
frs to 1 00 000 000 f rs
31 Keeping t echnical r ailway staff at work beyond the l egal w orking hours. I
100 000 frs to 1 0 00 000
32 Any worker who c ontinues w orking b eyond the r egulatory time limit.
I frs
200 000 frs to 5 00 000 f rs
33 Violation of the b an on s moking outside defined areas of t he t rain.
www.prc.cm
Refusai t o honour a summons i ssued by o fficers of t he R ailway Regulatory a nd Safety Authority,
34
without a legitimate reason. 100 000 frs to 5 00 0 00 f rs
Obstructing t he c onduct of a udits, inspections o r any other e xpertise provided for b y this law a nd its
35
implementing i nstruments.
Refusai t o provide the authorities r esponsible f or carrying out i nvestigations with r ecordings, materials 1 0 00 000 frs to 5 0 00 0 00
36
or any other document e nabling thern t o c arry out t heir duties. frs
I
Removal or retention o f all or p art of a train i nvolved i n a n a ccident o r incident, or claimimg o wnership 2 o oo 000 frs to 1 0 0 00 0 00
37
of an a bject that was on b oard that train. frs
1 0 00 000 frs to 5 000 0 00
38 Altering the s tate o f the r ail a ccident o r i ricident s ite.
frs 200
Assault, physical or verbal threats a gainst t echnical a nd safety p ersonnel in t he p erformance of t heir 000 frs to 2 0 0 00 000 f rs 5
39
duties. 000 000
frs to 1 0 000 000 frs
40 Damage to any safety device i nstalled on b oard a train.
Unauthorized p resence in areas prohibited by general r ailway safety regulations and i nstructions,
41 100 000 frs to 5 00 000 f rs
42 Allowing a nimais under one's c are to remain i n the s ame a reas and spaces.
Obstructing by any m eans and f or a ny reason w hatsoever, o f the railway or a t raffic track. 100 000 frs to 2 5 0 00 0 00
43
frs 2
000 000 frs to 2 5 0 00 0 00
44 lnfringement o f railway tracks established i n the i nterest of r ail t raffic.
frs
Whoever d eteriorates i nfrastructure or t he v arious adjoining t racks, e rects o r places objects on t he
500/ 1 00 000 frs to 25
45 premises o f railway facilities o f such a nature as t o c ompromise the s afety of r ail t raffic.
$10,000-Jrs
PRESI
70
ISLAMIC AIR
AND R SERVICE
FAIRS CARO ME
FIEE CO C EATIS:l!l;fl T AUS: AND


CHAPTER FOUR
ALLOCATION O F REVENUE
DIVISION 1
SPECIAL APPROPRIATIONS A CCOUNTS
SECTION T HIRTY-EIGHT: R epayment o f the financial t ransactions of the Special
Telecommunications Fund i nto t he G eneral B udget of the State.
(1) T he provisions o f SECTION 1 WENTY-1WO of L aw N o. 2019/023 of 24 D ecember
2019: F inance L aw of the R epublic o f C ameroon f or t he 2020 financial y ear,
instituting t he special appropriation account t itled " Special
Telecommunications Development Fund" are repealed.
(2) T he r evenue a nd e xpenditure i nitially a llocated to the said f und shall be r epaid
·
in f ull to the General B udget o f the S tate.
(3) T he revenue a nd e xpenditure r eferred t o in parageraph 2 a bove shall comprise:
(a) R evenue:
- the s hare of annual contributions f rom operators and s takeholders of e lec
tronic communications s ervices, u p t o 3 % of their turnover, e xclusive of
taxes;
revenue f rom the p roduction a nd p ublication of t he universal s ubscriber
wdirectory; ww.prc.cm
the percentage o f the e ntry a nd r enewal f ees f rom the sale a nd r enewal o f
authorizations;
50% of the b udget s urplus recorded a t the end o f financial year o n t he
transactions o f t he T elecommunications R egulatory A gency;
donations a nd l egacies.
(b) Expenditure:
- the financing of the e lectronic c ommunications u niversal s ervice;
- electronic c ommuications d evelopment o perations n ationwide;
- information and c ommunication technology ( ICT) d evelopment operations;
- activities r elated to the s ecurity o f electronic c ommunications networks a nd
information s ystems;
- the State's f inancial c ontributions to international _organizations i n the
communications s ector;
- any o ther s trategic operations d ecided b y t he President o f t he Republic.
SECTION T HIRTY-NINE: The c eiling for t he s pecial a ppropriations a ccount for s upport t o
cultural p olicies for t he y ear 2 024. i s fixed a t CFAF 300 000 000 (three hundred million)
SECTION F ORTY: The ceiling f or t he special appropriations a ccount for f inancing s ustainable
development p rojects i n the f ield o f w ater a nd sanitation for t he y ear 2 024 is fixed at CFAF 9 00
000 0 00 ( nine h undred m illion).
SECTION F ORTY-ONE: The c eiling f or r esources i ntended t o replenish the S pecial F und for
the P rotection o f W ildlife f or t he 2024 f inancial year i s fixed at CFAr
500 0 00 0 00 ( five h undred m illion).
PRESID .
p
71
TIRE ..
ORME
SERVICE O PY


SECTION FORTY-lWO: The ceiling for t axes t o b e p aid t o the S pecial F orestry Development Fund
for the 2 024 financial year i s fixed at C FAF 3 0 00 0 00 0 00 ( three billion).
SECTION F ORTY-THREE: The ceiling f or the N ational Environment and S ustainable Development
Fund i s fixed a t C FAF 1500 000 000 (one b illion f ive h undred million) for t he 2 024 f inancial
year.
SECTION F ORTY-FOUR: T he œ iling f or resources intended f or the s pecial appropriations
account f or t he d evelopment o f t he p ostal s ector f or the 2 024 f inancial y ear i s f ixed at
CFAF 9 00 0 00 0 00 ( nine hundred million).
SECTION FORTY-FJVE; T he ceiling f or r esources allocated to the S pecial Fund f or E lectronic
Security A ctivities f or t he 2 024 financial y ear i s f ixed a t C FAF 1 5 00 0 00 0 00 ( one b illion five
hundred million).
SECTION FORTY-SIX: The ceiling f or t he special a ppropriations a ccount f or t he s upport and
development o f t ourism a nd leisure a ctivities f or t he 2 024 f inancial year i s f ixed a t CFAF 1 000 0 00
000 ( one b illion).
SECTION F ORTY-SEVEN; T he c eiling for resources a llocated t o t he s pecial a ppropriations
account f or t he p roduction o f s ecure t ransport documents f or the 2 024 f inancial y ear i s
fixed a t C FAF 6 0 00 0 00 0 00 ( six b illion).
SECTION F ORTY-EIGHT: The c eiling for resources allocated t o the E lectricity Sector
Development F und for t he 2 024 f inancial year i s f ixed at C FAF 1 5 0 00 0 00 0 00 ( fifteen
billionw). ww.prc.cm
SECTION F ORTY-NINE: T he ceiling f or r esources a llocated to t he F und f or F inancing the
Reconstruction o f E conomie Disaster Areas of the F arÿNorth, NorthÿWest and S outh-West R egions
for the 2024 financial y ear is f ixed at CFAF 3 0 0 00 0 00 0 00 ( thirty b illion).
DIVISION 2
CEILING ON TAXES A LLOCATED T O P UBLIC BODIES
SECTION FIFTY: T he ceiling f or t he c ontribution allocated to t he C ameroon Housing Loan F und
(CFC) i s fixed a t C FAF 2 0 00 000 000 (two b illion) for t he 2 024 f inancial year.
SECTION FIFTY-ONE: T he ceiling f or t he contribution allocated to t he N ational Employment Fund
(NEF) i s fixed a t C FAF 9 0 00 000 000 (nine billion) f or t he 2 024 f inancial year.
SECTION F IFTY-lW0: The c eiling for p ublic c ontracts regulation t ees allocated t o the
Public C ontracts R egulation A gency ( ARMP) is f ixed at C FAF 8 000 0 00 0 00 ( eight
billion) f or t he 2 024 f inancial y ear.
SECTION F IFTY-THREE: The ceiling for t he p roceeds of t he S pecial T ax o n P etroleum Products
(STPP), toll a nd w eighing r eceipts, p aid into t he R oad F und i s f ixed a t C FAF 50 0 00 0 00 0 00 ( fifty
billion) f or the 2024 financial y ear.
SECTION FIFTY-FOUR: T he ceiling f or t he t ees p aid b y t he a utonomous p ort o rganizations t o the
National P ort Authority ( NPA) s hall be f ixed a t C FAF 5 100 0 00 0 00 ( five b illion o ne h undred
million) for the 2 024 financial y ear.
PRESIDE
PR 72
AREA,.
ELM S ERVICE
_ Tt1:a=1' T DI n-.,


SECTION F IFTY-FIVE: The c eiling f or revenue f rom v ehicle stamp d uty a llocated t o regional and local
authorities s hall b e fixed a t C FAF 7 0 00 0 00 0 00 ( seven b illion) f or t he 2 024 f inancial y ear.
SECTION F IFTY-SIX: T he c eiling o n the share o f resources from t he C ameroon H ousing L oan F und
and t he S pecial T elecommunications Fund allocated t o the l nvestment Promotion Agency (IPA) s hall be
fixed a t C FAF 6 0 00000000 ( six billion) f or the 2 024 f inancial year.
SECTION F IFTY-SEVEN: The c eiling f or the s hare of the r oyalty a nd p roceeds f rom f ines a llocated b y
Law N o. 2 011 /022 o f 1 4 D ecember 2 011 g oveming t he e lectricity sector t o the E lectricity S ector
Regulatory B oard ( ARSEL), s hall be fixed a t CFAF 4
500 000 0 00 ( four b illion five h undïed m illion) f or t he 2 024 financial year.
SECTION F IFTY-EIGHT: T he c eiling f or t he s hare o f entry f ees a nd/or r enewal f ees f or l icences granted
to p roviders o f n etwork a nd i nformation s ystem s ecurity s ervices, t he s hare of penalties imposed, the
annual f ee o f 0 .5% o f t he turnover o f o perators and o perators o f electronic c ommunications n etworks,
the s hare o f t he fee for the use o f addresses, p refixes and t elephone n umbers, a s well a s the s hare f rom
the f ees f or t he use of r adio f requencies allocated t o the N ational A gency for I nformation a nd
Communication T echnologies ( ANTIC), s hall b e f ixed at CFAF 5 500 000 0 00 ( five billion f iv(cid:127) e h undred
million) f or t he 2 024 financial y ear.
SECTION F IFTY-NINE: The ceiling f or t he share o f entry f ees a nd/or l icence r enewal fees f or a ctivities
in t he t elecommunications sector, t he share o f penalties i nstituted by the l aw g oveming electronic
commwunications1 wt he share o f w radio f reque.ncy u psage feesr, t he cs hare of. feesc f or t he u mse o f address es,
prefixes a nd n umbers o r blocks o f n umbers, and t he a nnual fee o f 1.5% of the p re-tax turnover o f network
operators a nd s ervice p roviders a llocated to t he T elecommunications Regulatory B oard ( ART), s hall be
fixed a t C FAF 1 5 000 0 00 0 00 ( fifteen billion) for t he f inancial year 2 ÿ24.
SECTION S IXTY: The c eiling f or aviation f ees a nd the s hare of fines c ollected i n a pplication of the l aw
governing c ivil aviation in Cameroon, a llocated to the C ameroon C ivil Aviation Authority ( CCAA), s hall be
fixed a t C FAF 1 6 500 0 00 0 00 (sixteen billion five h undred m illion) f or t he 2 024 f inancial year.
SECTION S IXTY-ONE: T he c eiling f or t he share o f the i nspection tax from t he I mport Verification
Programme (IVP) a llocated t o the National A gency for S tandards and Q uality (ANOR) shall be f ixed a t
CFAF 6 500 0 00 0 00 ( six b illion five h undred million) f or t he 2 024 f inancial y ear.
SECTION S IXTY-TWO: T he c eiling f or the share o f the l icence f ee d educted f rom t he t urnover o f
operators in t he e lectricity s ector and t he budget s urpluses of the e lectricity sector r egulator a llocated t o
the R ural E lectrification A gency ( AER), s hall be f ixed a t CFAF 4 000 0 00 000 ( four b illion) f or 2 024
financial year.
SECTION S IXTY-THREE: The c eiling f or t he s hare o f the d ues o n t he e xport of cocoa a nd coffee, a nd
the p roceeds f rom fines r esulting in particular f rom t he e xport o f poor quality p roducts allocated to the
Cocoa a nd C offee S ubsectors D evelopment F und (CCSDF), shall be f ixed at CFAF 8 000 0 00 000 ( eight
billion) f or t he 2 024 financial year.
...
PRESIDENCY O F L .. P ÍLOUE
PRESIDE
RE
RVICE 73
ME
and


SECTION SIXTY-FOUR: T he c eiling f or t he s hare of t he d ues on c ocoa and c offee
exports allocated t o t he National C ocoa a nd C offee Board (NCCB) s hall b e f ixed at CFAF
6000 0 00 000 ( six billion) f or t he 2024 financial y ear.
SECTION SIXTY-FIVE: The c eiling f or t he p roceeds of a nnual c ontributions from
professional shippers a nd fees for t he i ssue o f E lectronic C argo T racking S lips ( ECTS)
allocated to t he National Shippers' Council o f C ameroon ( NSCC), s hall b e f ixed at C FAF
7 000 000 000 (seven billion) f or t he 2 024 f inancial y ear.
SECTION SIXTY-SIX: The c eiling for r evenue f rom veterinary health i nspection t axes on
international trade and other veterinary health i nspection t axes allocated to t he M aritime
Fisheries Development F und (CDPM), s hall be f ixed at C FAF 1 500 0 00 0 00 ( one b illion
five h undred m illion) for t he 2024 financial year.
SECTION SIXTY-SEVEN: The c eiling for r evenue f rom the s hare o f t he h ealth a nd
veterinary inspection t ax on i mports, t he s hare of t he f ees for c ocoa and c offee e xports,
and the s hare o f a dditional consular t axes, allocated to t he C hamber of Agriculture,
Fisheries, L ivestock and F orestry ( CAPEF), shall be f ixed at C FAF 2 500 0 00 0 00
(two billion five. hundred million) for the 2 024 financial y ear.
SECTION SIXTY-EIGHT: The ceiling for r evenue f rom the s hare of t he h ealth a nd
veterinary inspection tax o n imports a nd t he s hare o f t he r evenue f rom farm taxes and
other veterinary health inspection t axes, allocated to t he N orth West L ivestock
Development Fund (CDENO), s hall b e f ixed at C FAF 1000 0 00 0 00 ( one billion) f or t he
2024 financial y ear.
www.prc.cm
SECTION S IXTY-NINE: The ceiling f or revenue from the share o f t he health and
veterinary import inspection t ax and t he s hare o f t he revenue from farm taxes and
other veterinary h ealth inspection t axes, a llocated to t he Livestock Development
Fund f or t he N orth ( CDEN), s hall be fixed a t C FAF 1 000 0 00 0 00 ( one b illion), f or
the 2024 financial year.
PART T HREE
PROVISIONS R ELATING T O THE BALANCE OF RESOURCES AND STATE
BUDGET EXPENDITURE
SECTION S EVENTY: The S tate budget for t he 2 024 financial y ear is b alanced in
resources and e xpenditure at C FAF 6 740 1 00 0 00 0 00, o f w hich CFAF 679 5 00 0 00 0 00
for the G eneral B udget a nd CFAF 6 0 6 00 0 00 0 00 f or S pecial Appropriations A ccounts.
CHAPTER ONE
EVALUATION OF RESOURCES
SECTION S EVENTY-ONE: T he proceeds a nd r evenue a pplicable t o t he G eneral
Budget o f the R epublic o f Cameroon f or t he 2024 f inancial year are e stimated a t C FAF
679 5 00 0 00 0 00, b roken d own b y revenue type as f ollows:
PRESIDENCY 0
PRESI
74
RE
VICE
ME
In


(Unit: m illions of C FAF)
ACCOUNTS HEADING 2023 2024
A-REVENUES 4 7 80 5 00 5 1 90 100
TITLE 1- T AX R EVENUES 3815700 4168 100
TAXES O N I NCOME, PROFITS A ND C APITAL
711 929 9 00 967 5 10
GAINS
TAXES ON S ALARIES A ND O THER
712 322 0 00 340 000
REMUNERATION
713 TAXES O N A SSETS 26 1 00 26 800
INTERNAL T AXES A ND D UTIES O N G OODS A ND
714 1 9 74 5 32 2 2 04 483
SERVICES
TAXES ON F OREIGN TRADE A ND I NTERNATIONAL
715 466 6 68 515 3 22
TRANSACTIONS
716 OTHER TAXES O N G OODS A ND S ERVICES 14 500 14 4 85
719 OTHER T AX R EVENUES 82 0 00 99 500
PART I l - GRANTS, C ONTRIBUTIONS AND
101 0 00 96 800
LEGAC/ES
741 GRANTS FROM I NTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 45 400 45 600
GRANTS FROM F OREIGN P UBLIC
742 55 600 51 200
ADMINISTRATIONS
PART I ll - S OCIAL C ONTRIBUTIONS 60 000 58 0 07
725 SOCIAL S ECURITY C ONTRIBUTIONSt 60 000 58 007
PART I V· O THER R EVENUE 803 8 00 867 1 93
w . - - . w · ··-· ·· w.pr . ... - · c ··- · · . . . . . . .... . .. . . . . c . . . ·-- - -- - - .. - · - - ·-· · · m · - ·- · · · · ---· -- -· --- - - · · - · - ··· - ·· --
INCOME FROM S TATE P ROPERTY AND A SSETS
721 684 8 14 714 713
OTHER T HAN I NTEREST
722 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES A ND C HARGES 28 1 26 29 295
723 FINES, PENALTIES AND F INANCIAL SANCTIONS 9447 10 960
729 OTHER N ON-TAX R EVENUES 15 137 42888
REFUNDS TO T HE TREASURY O F A MOUNTS WRONGLY
752 426
PAID
754 PROCEEDS F ROM THE S ALE O F F IXED A SSETS 282 294
759 OTHER E XCEPTIONAL INCOME 35 1 16 52 322
771 INTEREST O N L OANS A ND O VERDRAFTS 49 57
772 INTEREST O N T ERM D EPOSITS 726 I 842
.
774 INTEREST O N M ARKETABLE SECURITIES 231 268
775 HOLDING G AINS O N F INANCIAL A SSETS 28 9 00 14 966
776 FOREIGN E XCHANGE GAINS 253 340
779 OTHER F INANCIAL INCOME 293 248
B - L OANS AND O THER FINANCING 1 8 62 000 1489400
141 TREASURY BONDS 450 0 00 375 0 00
151 MUL Tl L ATERAL P ROJECT L OANS 3. 13 2 71 357 3 75
PROJECT L OANS F ROM G OVERNMENTS
15-2 16 9 30 10 383
AFFILIATED TO T HE P ARIS C LUB
INITIAL PROJECT L . OANS FROM G OVERNMENTS
153 267 5 57 314 0 40
NOT A FFILIATED T O THE P ARIS CLUB
PROJECT L OANS F ROM F OREIGN P RIVATE
155 197 5 42 ÿ25 3 54
SECTOR ORGANISATIONS
ÿ
I 75
JANUARY
IF AND R E LEMENTARY
- ... ~ . . (cid:127) ~nn -· · - "'"'IIIIVl'l111rrAIRSCn A (cid:127)(cid:127)ÿR HE REPU C
COPIE C ERTIFIEE CO S:t'\DUC ltiOEXSERVICE j


(Unit: millions o f CFAF)
ACCOUNTS HEADING 2023 2024
161 MUL T l LATERAL PROGRAMME L OANS 238 0 00 125 9 00
INITIAL P ROGRAMME LOANS F ROM
162 27 000 26 000
GOVERNMENTS AFFILIATED TO THE PARIS CLUB
OTHER I NITIAL LOANS FROM EXTERNAL
175 200 0 00 0
PRIVATE-SECTOR B ODIES
OTHER I NITIAL DOMESTIC L OANS - PUBLIC
176 71 7 00
ADMINISTRATIONS
512 BANK O F CENTRAL A FRICAN STATES 55 349
517 GOLD A ND SOR 80 000 0
TOTAL R ESOURCES OF THE GENERAL S TATE B UDGET (A+B) 6 642 5 00 6 679 500
SECTION S EVENTY-TWO: The r esources of the S pecial A llocation Accounts for the
2024 f inancial year a re estimated a t C FAF 6 0 600 000 000, b roken d own as follows by t ype o f
revenue:
No. REVENUE I TEM 2023 2024
www.prc.cm
ELECTRICITY S ECTOR DEVELOPMENT F UND 15 000 0 00 0 00 15 000 0 00 0 00
1 The share o f the water c harge o r w ater r ights T he 2 000 0 00 0 00 3 000 0 00 000
share o f the fines a nd p enalties collected u nder l aw No. 2 011 /022 o f 1 4 December 2 011
2 2 500 0 00 0 00 1 000 0 00 000
governing the e lectricity s ector T he s hare o f t he State's
dividends from its holdings in e lectricity sector companies a s fixed by the State's
3 2 000 0 00 0 00 500 0 00 000
finance law T he share of t he entry o r r enewal fees of
4 electricity s ector operators The s hare o f t he p roceeds from t he sale o f e lectricity 150 0 00 0 00 250 0 00 0 00
from the M emve'ele hydroelectric d am The a nnual contributions o f o perators h olding a
5 1 000 0 00 0 00 1500 000 0 00
franchise or l icence
in the e lectricity s ector, a mounting t o 1 % o f t heir a nnual turnover excluding tax, the
basis for calculating turnover being, f or p roducers for i ndustrial p urposes, e xclusively
6 6 500 0 00 0 00 5 200 0 00 0 00
limited to activity in the elèctricity sector the s hare o f the water r oyalty C arry-
over (balance t o b e c arried o ver)
7 50 000 0 00 0
8 800 0 00 0 00 3 550 0 00 0 00
SPECIAL F UND FOR T HE FINANCING O F THE R ECONSTRUCTION
OF ECONOMICALL Y D ISTRESSED AREAS OF THE FAR-NORTH, 29 131 0 00 0 00 30 000 0 00 000
NORTH-WEST AND SOUTH-WEST R EGIONS
1 IDBfunding 4 267 9 05 6 50 4 267 9 05 6 50
2 Government s ubsidies 15 000 0 00 0 00 15 000 0 00 000
3 JAPAN A ssistance F und 1358 855 3 72 1358 855 372
4 Carry f orward ( balance t o b e c arried f orward) 8 504 2 38 9 78 9 ?,.]3 2 38 978
POSTAL S ECTOR D EVELOPMENT 900 0 00 0 00 900 0 00 000
PRESI
76
E'GISLATIF E NTARY
IVE A ND STATUTORY A ff AIRS C X S ERVICE
IE CERTIFIEE C WHICH;
,


-
No. REVENUE ITEM 2023 2024
Other l evy o n p ublic a nd p rivate o perators to finance public s ervice
1 570 000 000 564 994 5 53
missions
Levies in r espect o f the exer,c ise b y ptivate o perators o f licensed
2 activities, i n accordance with the p rovisions o f the l aw c arried out b y postal 180 000 000 72 000 000
activity
3 Carry f orward ( balance to be c artied forward) 150 000 000 263 00544 7
SPECIAL F UND FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY 1000 000 000 1500 000 000
Annual c ontributions f rom a ccredited certification authorities, security
auditors, publishers o f security software, other a uthotised security s ervice
1 1 000 000 1 000 000
providers editor's s ecurity software and o ther service p roviders safety
approved, u p t o 1.5% of their t u A
2 fee for t he use of addresses, p refixes and t elephone numbers Carry 710 000 000 710 000 0 00
3 forward ( balance to be c artied forward) 289 000 000 789 000 0 00
SUPPORT F OR CULTURAL POLICY 500 000 000 300 000 0 00
Contribution of s ervices a ttached to the Ministry in c harge of a rts and c ulture
1 20 000 000 10 000 0 00
Contributions of collective m anagement o rganizations to the p romotion o f cultural
2 80 000 000 50 000 0 00
policy
3 Operating rights f or film-related activities 94 000 000 34 000 0 00
4 Rights of e xploitation of cultural h eritage 13 0 00 000 13 000 000
www.prc.cm
5 Rights arising from t he activities o f the s hows 30 000 000 30 000 000
6 Rights of e xploitation o f book and reading a ctivities 3 000 000 3 000 000
The royalties p aid u nder the representation o r fixing o f folklore for i ts
7 100 000 000 50 000 000
lucrative exploitation
Remuneration f or private copying o f phonograms, v ideograms a nd p rinted
8 140 000 000 100 000 000
works lncome
9 from the rentai of cultural c enters, venues a nd podium coaches 20 0 00 000 10 000 0 00
FINANCING O F WATER AND SANITATION S USTAINABLE
900 000 000 900 000 000
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
1 Fines and transactions 50 0 00 000 50 0 00 0 00
.2 Other U nallocated R evenue 220 000 000 20 000 0 00
3 Contributions from i nternational donors and a ll voluntary contributions 0 30 000 0 00
4 Share of t he water charges 0 350 000 000
5 Water w ithdrawal c harges 250 000 000 200 000 0 00
6 Carry forward ( balance t o be c arried forward) 130 000 000 100 000 000
7 sanitation t ax 250 000 000 150 000 000
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT A ND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
2 000 000 000 1500 0 00 000
FUND
1 Fees f or a ccess t o genetic r esources 2 000 000 6 000 000
2 Fees for i ssuing ARCE 0 50 0 00 000
3 Fees for i ssuing waste t raceability manifests 50 000 000 50 0 00 000
4 Technical v isa tees 543 000 000 250 000 000
----
/ 77
ELEMENTARY
... _ _ __ MncwCtr-nluf\ ..


No. REVENUE ITEM 2023 2024
Fees for e xamining t he approval files of the design o ffices for
5 2 0 00 000 2 0 00 000
Environmental and Social I mpact Studies and Environ m ental Audits
6 Environmental p ermit file review fees 35 000 000 35 000 0 00
Examination fees for E nvironmental and Social I mpact Assessment r eports and
7 400 000 000 400 000 000
Environmental Audits
Fees for e xamining t he terms o f reference relating to Environmental and
8 3 5 0 000 000 3 50 0 00 000
Social Impact Studies and E nvironmental Audits
Produces transaction fines as provided f or by the f ramework l aw on environmental
9 318 000 000 57 000 000
management
10 Carry f orward ( balance to be carried forward) 300 000 000 300 000 000
FORESTRY D EVELOPMENT 2 5 00 0 00 000 3 000 0 00 000
1 Authorizations to open l ogging y ards 180 000 000 180 000 000
2 Certificates of R egistration as a T imber Processor (CEQTB) 3 000 000 2 000 000
3 Certificates of R egistration a s a Timber E xporter (CEQEB) 37 0 00 000 40 000 0 00
4 Annual Logging P ermit (ALP) a llocation a nd r enewal fees 30 0 00 000 40 0 00 000
5 Annual Operating Certificate ( AOC) allocation a nd r enewal fees 30 000 0 00 40 000 000
6 Fee for t he i ssuance o f the boundary c ertificate 2 000 000 20 000 000
7 Fees for t he i ssuance o f the certificate o f origin 2 000 000 35 0 00 000
8 Fees for the i ssuance o f the certificate o f conformity o f t he drilling plan 2 000 000 1000 0 00
9 Application fee for approval of development p lans 13 000 000 8 0 00 000
www.prc.cm
10 Application fee for t he granting of approvals 10 000 0 00 1000 000
11 Application fees for t he allocation o f forest c oncessions 15 000 000 15 000 0 00
12 Cities p ermit 170 000 000 650 000 000
13 Operating permit for s pecial products 10 000 000 6 5 00 000
Share of r evenue f rom fines, transactions, damages, p ublic a uctions or p rivate a uctions
14 500 000 000 500 000 0 00
of s eized products a nd a bjects
15 Carry f orward ( balance to be c arried forward) 700 000 000 803 500 000
Resources f rom the sale of secure documents resulting f rom the contribution
16 of o perators in accordance with r egulatory p rovisions, t he unit cost of which i s F CFA 796 000 000 65 8 0 00 000
100,000
SPECIAL WILDLIFE PROTECTION F UND 500 0 00 0 00 500 0 00 000
1 leasing f ees 100 000 000 100 000 000
2 "Garne farming" a nd " game-ranching" l icence fees 5 0 00 000 1000 0 00
3 Hunting guide licence fees 13 000 000 15 000 000
4 Wildlife capture permit tees 1000 0 00 3 000 000
5 Smalt game h unting l icence fees 2 0 00 000 1000 000
6 Scientific research p ermit tees 3 000 000 3 0 00 000
7 Permit fees a nd h unting l icences 14 000 000 30 0 00 000
8 Entry fees t o p rotected a reas 30 0 00 000 20 000 000
9 Scientific purpose overflight p ermit t ees 5 0 00 000 0
Application tees f or t he allocation of approvals f or wildlife harvesting activities and
10 5 000 000 3 000 000
protected a reas
11 Application fees for t he allocation of timber s ales 5 0 00 000 0
PRESI
78
ENTAIRE
OEX SERVICE
SHAPE
l'::l=DTll:11:ft - r : -- ...


I N o. I REVENUE ITEM 2023 I 2024 7
-
~ 12 Application fees for t he allocation of hunting areas 10 0 00 000 0
-
~ Application fees for t he allocation of approvals f or w ildlife harvesting a ctivities and
13 5 000 000 0
protected a reas ,#
r-- -
Fees for t he review of the ZIC ZICGC a nd G ame-Farming W ildlife lnventory S urvey
14 5 000 000 0
Plans
- -
Fees f or t he review o f Wildlife l nvenrt,o ry R eports f or Z IC ZICGC and
15 5 000 000 0
Game-Farming
Operating costs f or i nfrastrut c ture a nd e quipm, ent i n p rotected areas a nd z oologîcal g ardens
16 5 0 00 000 3 0 00 000
~ Fees for e xamining Z ic, ZICGC and G ame-Farming W ildlife l nventory l nventory R eports
17 20 0 00 000 3 000 000
Operating Costs of Infrastructure and Equipment in P rotected A . reas a nd
18 . 5 000 000 3 000 000
Zoological G ardens
Fees f or r equesting a r eview o f ZIC, ZICGC a nd G ame-Farming
19 5 0 00 000 1 000 000
Management Plans, Private Z oological G ardens
20 Wildlife Product Transformer Registration C ertificates 5 0 00 000 0
~ 21 Certificates o f R egistration as a n E xporter of W - ildlife Products - 5 0 00 000 0
Proc. e eds from f ines, t ransaction, damages, p ublic a uctions o r o ver-the- c ounter s ales o f
22 45 0 00 0 00 50 0 00 000
seized products and m iscell,#a neous items
23 Carry forward (balance t o be carried forward) 78 0 00 0 00 120 000 000
Resources for t he s ale o f secure d ocuments for t he T ransport of W ildlife p roducts
24 30 0 00 000 10 0 00 000
~ Subsidies, contributions, donations a nd bequests f rom any n atural o r l egal p erson
25 20 0 00 000 30 0 00 000
www.prc.cm
-
26 Slaughter t ax 70 0 00 000 100 000 0 00
-
27 Detention tax 1 000 0 00 1 000 000
28 Operating tax 3 000 000 3 0 00 000
r--
~ PRODUCTION OF S ECURE T R. ANSPORT DOCUMENTS I 6 000 0 00 0 00 6 00 I 0 0 00 0 00
-
1 lntercity r oad t ransport terminal operator licence 1500 0 00 1500 0 00
t----- -
2 Travel m anager approval in a n intercity road transport terminal 1 500 000 1500 0 00
'
i---- -
3 Authorization o f f reight c onsolidators and u nconsolidators 1500 0 00 1500 000
-
~ 4 Approval of d riving schools 1500 0 00 1500 000
,-- -
Approvals f or t he professions of road transport operator a nd road t ransport a uxiliary
5 60 0 00 000 6.0 000 0 00
~ 6 Approvals for t he professions of maritime a nd p ara-maritime t ransporters 100 0 00 000 100 0 00 000
-
7 Provisional authorizations 3 0 00 000 3 0 00 000
,__
8 Public r oad t ransport cards (blue c ards) 656 0 00 000 656 000 0 00
r--
9 Capacity c ertificates 54 5 00 000 54 5 00 000
r--
10 Motorized canoe c apacity c ertificates 5 000 000 5 000 000
~ 11 Certificates of t ug capacities 3 000 0 00 3 000 0 00
~ 12 Vehicle registration certificates (gray cards) 3 000 000 0 00 3 000 000 0 00
-
13 Transport l icences . 100 0 00 000 100 0 00 000
-
~ 14 Temporary Maritime B ook 3 000 0 00 3 000 000
-
15 Professional maritime booklets 2 500 0 00 2 5 00 000
16 License t o d rive pleasure b oats 2 000 0 00 2 000 000
I I I J
PRes, P
DENC~1..ru1:1~ '79
RESIO :.,,. ur- THE R!Pu C A RIAT G
GISLATIF (cid:127)
M RY A FFAIR F1ee
TIS:11:r,. I ENTARY
-- 1'DE.ÿ T RAINED
SERVICE


No. REVENUE ITEM 2023 2024
17 National and international driving l icence 1300 000 0 00 1 300 0 00 0 00
18 Navigation p ermit 5 000 0 00 5 000 0 00
19 Carry f orward (balance to be carried f orward) 500 0 00 0 00 5 00 0 00 0 00
20 Security V isits 200 0 00 0 00 2 00 0 00 0 00
SUPPORT A ND DEVELOPMENT O F . T OURISM AND L EISURE
1000 000 0 00 1 000 000 0 00
ACTIVITIES
1 Fines and transactions 90 0 00 000 90 0 00 000
2 Concession to n atural or legal p ersans o f c lassified tourist s ites 5 0 00 000 5 0 00 000
3 File f ees for tourist c oncessions 25 000 000 10 0 00 0 00
.
Fees for the submission of a pplications for t he c onstruction r enewal e xtension
4 100 000 000 30 0 00 000
approval and ope- r ation o f t ourism and l eisure facilities
Rentai of h otels built with public capital a nd given under free management
5 180 000 000 160 000 0 00
to national or foreign natural or l egal persons
6 Share of r evenue f rom a ccess fees i n national parks a nd wildlife r eserves 5 000 0 00 5 0 00 000
7 Share of t he proceeds o f t he t ourist t ax 500 0 00 0 00 600 0 00 000
8 Licence fee 35 0 00 0 00 40 0 00 000
Fee c ollected d uring the i ssuance of b uilding p ermits a nd t he o pening o f h otel
9 30 0 00 000 20 000 000
establishments
10 Carry forward (balance to be carried f orward) 30 0 00 000 40 0 00 0 00
www.prc.cm
TOTAL S AAA REVENUE l 84 4 31 0 00 0 00 6 0 6 0 I 0 0 00 0 00
CHAPTERlWO
STATE BUDGET EXPENDITURE E VALUATION
SECTION S EVENTY-THREE: E xpenditure u nder general b udget o f t he R epublic of
Cameroon f or the 2 024 f inancial year is evaluated at CFAF 6 679 5 00 0 00 000, b roken
down b y econom ic c ategory a s follows:
(Unit: Thousand C FAF)
CODE ITEM 2023 2024
I
CURRENT EXPENDITURES 5 2 83 2 49 9 99 5 027 4 30 000
Section 1 Financial charges o f t he d ebt 1962 841 5 00 1688 300 0 00
14 Government securities o f m ore than one y ear 239 3 98 5 00 204 2 84 000
141 Treasury B onds 239 3 98 5 00 169 6 37 0 00
144 Accrued interest not yet d ue on g overnment s ecurities o ver one year 34 6 47 0 00
15 Project loans 673 1 06 0 00 748 2 23 000
151 Multilateral p roject loans 138 3 04 0 00 110 9 78 0 00
152 Project loans f rom governments a ffiliated to t he Paris Club 166 4 74 0 00 50 7 9-)000
P P R R E E S S ID 1 ENC ÿ E ÿ o ÿÿ E ÿ LA ÿ R E ; P > U8 l T HURSDAY IC 80
-· ......... ~
E ATIVE AND A
IRE
FFAIRS CA , RVICE
EC
__ RMI=
.


(Unit: Thousand CFAF)
CODE ITEM 2023 2024
153 Initial p roject loans f rom n on-governments affiliated t o t he P aris Club 268120 000 382 576 000
154 lnterest accrued a nd not y et due o n project loans 135 291 000
155 Project loans from external private bodies 100 208 000 68 5 86 000
17 Otherloans 727 437 000 597 693 000
174 Accrued and u nmatured i nterest on other b orrowings 12 0 62 000
176 Other i nitial b orrowing f rom general g ovemment 89 1 91 0 00
177 Other i nitial borrowings f rom institutions and administrations 727 437 000 496 440 000
67 Financial e xpenses of the d ebt 322 900 000 138 100 0 00
671 lnterest and f inancial e xpenses on d ebt 322 900 000 138 100 000
Section 2 Personnel expenditure 1 311 725 500 1 431 018 100
66 Personnelexpenses 1 311 725 500 1 431 018 1 00
661 . G ross salaries of personnel with special s tatus in t he public service 1 2 40 026 048 1 360 152 4 66
663 Gross s alary o f personnel w ith overall p ay 5 223 358 5 223 3 58
665 Emoluments, gratifications and other a llowances excluding s alaries 86 7 62 86 7 62
666 Personnel remuneration other t han p ay 19 6 61 407 16 9 88 9 01
669 Other p ersonnel e xpenditure 46 7 27 925 48 5 66 6 13
Section 3 Ewxpenditurew on g oods wa nd service.s prc.c94m1 201 000 1 062 29 1 1 42
60 Purchase of goods 291 884 162 312 173 1 00
601 Materials, e quipment a nd s upplies 87 1 58 502 91 9 30 0 62
605 Water, electricity, g as a nd o ther e nergy sources 66 8 08 614 72 8 77 511
606 Specific equipment a nd supplies 137 917 046 147 365 5 27
61 Purchase of s ervices 312 490 067 563 631 781
611 Transport a nd mission expenses 54 9 85 716 69 2 86 7 15
612 Rent 17 1 51 500 19 4 05 4 06
613 Fees a nd s tudies 41 0 28 615 38 8 37 039
614 Care and m aintenance 25 1 33 174 26 1 19 9 55
615 They b orrow. 2 583 653 2 9 97 7 80
617 Public relations-communication Fees 58 9 93 140 61 5 14 121
618 Staff training c osts 23 7 02 750 32 8 79 6 08
619 Other a cquisitions o f s ervices 88 9 11 519 312 591 1 57
62 Other s ervices ( Refund of r evenues received) 85 7 00 000 85 5 41 8 50
624 Taxes and i nternai taxes on g oods and s ervices 84 0 00 000 84 0 00 0 00
625 Taxes on foreign t rade a nd i nternational transactions 1500 0 00 1500 0 00
626 Other t ax r evenue 20 0 00
627 Non-tax r evenue 200 000 21 8 50
69 Current expenditure breakdowns 251 126 771 100,944 4 11
690 Current e xpenditure b reakdowils 251 126 771 100 944 411
PRESIDE
81
LEGISLATIVE
NE A ND R ÿ0 S fMl:m3RY AFFAIRS CAR
SERVCIC&E IRI! - T--IS::U:.1!: CO IHAf!!


(Unit: Thousand CFAF)
CODE ITEM 2023 2024
Section 4 Transfer E xpenditure 1 0 65 435 999 8 43 810 758
63 Subsidies 11 247187 1 3 026 659
632 Subsidies t o p ublic e nterprises 1 550 0 00 3 8 84 3 00
633 Subsidies to p rivate enterprises 5 8 46 000 4 5 61 0 00
639 Subventions to o ther c lasses of r ecipients 3 8 51 187 4 5 81 3 59
64 Transfers 1 0 54 188 812 830 784 0 98
641 Transfers to n ational public e stablishments 159 7 66 940 172 060 189
642 Transfers to d ecentralised local a uthorities 24 162 698 20 060 525
643 Transfers t o o ther p ublic a dministrations 159 000 309 0 00
645 Transfers t o h ouseholds 511 442 0 00 194 657 200
Transfers t o s upranational authorities and c ontributions t o i nternational
646 11719 469 11 464 469
on::ianisations
647 Transfers to o ther p ublic budgets 51 1'90 0 00 51 544 011
648 Pensions o f o fficiais and o ther s ervants of t he S tate 259 296 000 269 6 68 000
649 other t ransfers 36 452 704 111 0 20 704
Section 6 O ther e xpenditure 2 0 46 000 2 010 000
65 Exceptional c harges 2 0 46 000 2 010 0 00
www.prc.cm
659 Other exceptional charges 2 046 0 00 2 0 10 000
CAPITAL E XPENDITURE 1 359 250 0 00 1 6 52 070 000
Section 3 E xpenditure o n g oods a nd s ervices 28 589 284 25 906 981
61 Purchase o f s ervices 28 589 2 84 25 906 981
613 Fees a nd s tudies 28 589 284 25 906 981
Section 4 T ransfer Expenditure 136 454 297 167153 7 45
64 Transfers 136 454 297 167153 7 45
641 Transfers t o n ational public e stablishments 21282 892 23 506 213
642 Transfers t o d ecentralised l ocal authorities 115 111 405 143 4 87 532
643 Transfers to o ther p ublic a dministrations 60 000 160 0 00
Section 5 Capital Expenditure 1 194 206 4 19 1 4 59 009 275
21 Intangible f ixed a ssets 39 341 860 4 2 711 421
211 Research a nd d evelopment e xpenses 35 804 8 60 39 675 536
212 Patents, t rademarks, c opyrights 34 800 108 000
213 Organizational S ystems Design - Software P ackages 3 487 200 2 9 27 8 85
219 Other intangible assets 15 000
22 Unproduced capital assets 43 973 797 37 223 0 32
221 Land 39 251 295 29 944 4 57
223 Plantations and d rills 1 4 72 502 516 5 00
224 Bodies of w ater 3 250 0 00 6 7 00 000
PRESIDENCY
82


(Unit: Thousand C FAF)
CODE ITEM 2023 2024
229 Other non-prodUced fixed a ssets 62 0 75
23 Acquisitions, c onstruction and major r epairs o f b uildings 959 273170 1 198 076 777
231 Administrative buildings for office u se 51 153 028 63 7 31 555
232 Administrative buildings used for accommodation ( civilian a nd military) 20 614 011 19 777 163
233 Administrative b uildings for technical use 34 670 509 55 900 380
234 Books 290 450 281 393 205 251
235 Infrastructure 561 882 982 664 796 530
236 Computer Networks 502 359 665 8 97
24 Acquisitions and m ajor repairs o f equipment and furniture 130 240 517 124 430 859
241 Housing and office fumiture a nd equipment 44 455 138 34 6 00 708
242 Office computer e quipment 5 575 697 5 485 1 09
243 Transport equipment 11 901 687 14 659 4 56
244 Technical equipment a nd tools 65 757 995 68 300 586
245 Valuables - Collections - works of a rt 1090 000 1 090 000
247 Strategic or e mergency stocks 35 0 00
249 Other equipment and furniture 1460 000 260 000
25 Mwilitary Equipwment w.prc.c1m2 877 075 26 5671 85
250 Military buildings 5 061 327 .4 398 676
251 Mi!itary bases 722 067 2 306 6 94
252 Military structures and infrastructure 3 078 221 13 829 388
253 Furniture, military m aterials and equipment 1 393 326 1 173 437
254 Police w orks and infrastructure 289 0 00
255 Police f urniture, materials a nd equipment 304 5 00
256 Office Buildings 757 6 34 1635491
258 Current equipment of t he armed f orces a nd police forces 1864 500 2 630 000
26 Equity i nvestments, related receivables and g uarantees 8 500 000 30 000 000
262 Externat e quity imiestments 8 500 000 30 000 000
TOTAL EXPENSES 6 642 500 000 6 679 500 000
SECTION SEVENTY-FOUR: T he e xpenditures of the special appropriation a ccounts for the
2024 financial year i s estimated at CFAF 6 0 600 0 00 0 00 a nd s hall b e broken d own as f ollows
by t ype o f e xpenditure:
(Unit: t housands of F CFA)
CODE HEADING 2023 2024
CURRENT EXPENDITURES 26 389 678 40 470 000
23 7 70 1 49 4 0 0 60 0 00
3 Expenditure on goods and services
PRESIDENT
PR
83
TAIR
X S tRVICt
SHAPE
DT OPY
.


(Unit· t housands FCFA)
I CODE HEADING 2023 T l 2024
60 Purchase o f g oods 9 328 0 81 7 440 5 04
'
601 Materials, equipment and s upplies 151 8 1 25 811 5 00
605 Water, electricity, gas and o ther energy sources 1 145091 445 000
606 Specific equipment and s upplies 6 664 8 65 6 184 0 04
61 Purchase o f s ervices 10 991 2 52 2 619 4 96
611 Transport and m ission expenses 2 0 16 5 76 766 4 96
612 Rent 55 800 54 000
613 Fees a nd s tudies 4 3 83 342 58 000
614 Gare and m aintenance 301 5 00 80 000
617 Public relations-communication Fees 24 06 434 754 000
618 Staff training costs 1 762100 776 5 00
619 Other acquisitions of s ervices 65 500 130 5 00
69 Current e xpenditure b reakdowns 3 450 8 16 3 0 000 0 00
690 Current expenditure b reakdowns 3 4 50 8 16 3 0 000 0 00
4 Transfer Expenditure 2 619 5 29 410 0 00
www.prc.cm
63 Subsidies 650 0 00 40 000
632 Subsidies to p ublic enterprises 2 1 0 000 0
633 Subsidies to p rivate e nterprises 400 0 00 0
639 Subventions to o ther classes of r ecipients 40 000 40 000
64 Transfers 1 9 69529 370 0 00
641 Transfers t o n ational public e stablishments 0 300 000
Transfers t o s upranational a uthorities and contributions t o international organisations
646 1 4 71 5 29 70 000
other transfers
649 4 9 8 000 0
CAPITAL E XPENDITURE 58 041 3 21 20 130 000
3 Expenditure on g oods and services 2 0 30 0 00 3 078 085
60 Purchase of goods 0 90 000
601 Materials, equipment and s upplies 0 10 0 00
606 Specific equipment and s upplies 0 80 000
· 61 Purchase o f s ervices 2 0 30 0 00 2 988 085
613 Fees a nd s tudies 2 030 0 00 2 9 73 0 85
618 Staff training costs 0 10 000
619 Other acquisitions of s ervices 0 5000
4 Transfer E xpenditure 377 000 533 000
84
PR
TAIR
LEGISLÿll
H S ERVICE
î8RY ÿ fFMRS
-r11::11a: ORtJIE


(Unit: t housands of FCFA)
CODE HEADING 2023 2024
64 Transfers 377 0 00 533 000
641 Transfers t o national public establishments 267 0 00 211 000
642 Transfers t o decentralised local a uthorities 110 0 00 310 000
Transfers t o supranational a uthorities a nd c ontributions to i nternational o rganisations
646 0 12 0 00
5 Capital E xpenditure 55 634 3 21 1 6 518 9 15
21 Intangible fixed a ssets 481 600 545 0 00
211 Research and d evelopment e xpenses 0 10 0 00
212 Patents, trademarks, c opyrights 481 6 00 305 000
213 Organizational S ystems D esign - Software P ackages 0 230 0 00
22 Unproducèd capital assets 214 000 146 0 00
221 Land 214 0 00 120 0 00
224 Bodies o f water 0 26 000
23 Acquisitions, c onstruction a nd m ajor repairs o f b uildings 27 6 58 9 77 409 331
231 Administrative b uildings f or office use 2 2 76 3 14 192 9 08
232 wAdministrativwe b uildings u sewd f or a ccomm.odatiopn (civilian arnd milcitary) .cm0 2 6423
234 Books 739 5 79 190 0 00
235 1 n fra.structure 24 643 0 84 0
24 Acquisitions and m ajor r epairs o f equipment a nd furniture 27 2 55 7 44 15 3 78 5 84
241 Housing and o ffice fumiture and e quipment 21 716 0 57 1 3 7 47 5 84
242 Office c omputer e quipment 450 0 00 654 000
243 Transport e quipment 387 0 00 392 000
244 Technical e quipment a nd t ools 4 6 52 6 87 585 0 00
245 Valuables - C ollections - w orks of art 50 0 00 0
25 Military E quipment 24 0 00 40 000
258 Current equipment o f the a rmed forces and p olice f orces 24 000 0
259 Other fixed a ssets of the. a rmed forces and p olice 0 40 0 00
TOTAL E XPENDITURE 84 4 31 0 00 60 6 00 0 00
PRESIDENCE OF THE R P
PRESIDENCY . I t >i...:_,;;;.--2"
s
TO B E "~ ~in,~
And R VICE.
TIFIEE C RME
TIFIED TRU PY
85


CHAPTER THREE
BUDGET BALANCE
SECTION SEVENTY-FIVE: For the 2 024 financial y ear, t he b alance of t he S tate budget b alance
resulting f rom r evenue e stimates a nd e xpenditure ceilings p re(cid:127) sented i n Sections S eventy-one, S eventy-
two, Seventy-three and S eventy-four a bove shall b e fixed as f ollows:
(ln b illions of CFA f rancs)
REVENUE I AMOUNT I I EXPENDITURE I AMOUNT
1. G ENERAL B UDGET
-
l CURRENT E XPENDITURE (Parts 2 , 3 , 4 and6) I
INTERNAL R EVENUE 5,190.1 3,755.1
-
Gross tax r evenue 3,968.3 Gross interest a nd c ommissions 320.1
fncfuding V AT c redlt r efunds 84.0 Foreign d ebt i nterest r elief 0.0
Net t ax revenue 3,884.3 Personnel expenditure 1,428.3
Oil revenue 809.5 Goods a nd s ervices 1,003.3
/nc/uding s tudies and p roject m anagement
16.8
related t o the i nvestment
Npn-tax r evenue 315.5 Current transfers 1,003.4
/nc/uding capital transfers t o L RAs a nd P Es 143.1
Total n et i nternai r evenue 5,009.3
lncluding sub.s. idies paid t o CASs. 15.0
DONATIONS 96.8 CAPITAL E XPENDITURE (Part 5) 1,472.1
www.prc.cm
Programme d onations 58.7 External f ina, ncing 831.3
Project d ona . t i ons 38.1 Own resources 600.8
EXCEPTIONAL I NCOME 0.0 Shareholding/Restructuring 40.0
Privat,;i_s ation r evenue OTHER E XPENDITURE 0.0
I
Deducti(cid:127) ons from r evenue to f und the
special n ational s o/idarity f und for the fight a gainst 0.0 Net loans 0.0
the C oronavirus
NET R EVENUE GENERAL BUDGET 5,106.1 GENERAL B UDGET EXPENDITURE 5,227.3
Il - S PECIAL T REASURY A CCOUNTS
Special p urpose a ccounts 56.4 Special purpose a ccounts .. 60.6
lncluding F ar North, North West and South W est lncluding Far North, N orth West and S outh
25.8 30.0
Special Reconstruction F und West Special R econstruction Fund
Jncluding govemment subsidies 15.0
JAPAN Assistance Fund 1.3
Other s pecial p urpose accounts 30.6 Other s pecial allocation accounts 30.6
TOTAL N ET STATE BUDGETARY TOTAL S TATE BUDGETARY
5,147.4 5,272.8
REVENUE EXPENDITURE
Ill - BALANCES
Amou. n t %ofGDP
FINANCING CAPACITY/REQUIREMENT -125.4 -0.4
OVERALL B ALANCE -125.4 -0.4
CEMAC R EFERENCE B ALANCE -220.6 -0.7
86


CHAPTER F OUR
OVERALL F INANCING A ND A UTHORIZATIONS
SECTION S EVENTY-SIX: F or the 2024 financial year, r esources a nd c ash e xpenditure
that c ontribute t o achieving f inancial balance are estimated a s follows:
(ln billions of CFA francs)
FINANCING A ND CASH FLOW
FINANCING AND C ASH F LOW N EEDS AMOUNT AMOUNT
RESOURCES
I
Ovêrall b udget d eficit 125.4 ProjMt l oans Q07.2
Amortisation o f s tructured d ebt 1128.5 l ssuance o f g overnment s ecurities 6 43.0 E FP 375.0
External d ebt Budgetary support 485.5 B ank 134.0
Domestic d ebt financing VAT e scrow 139.4
Outstanding T reasury/unstructured d ebt C M 220.0 account 84.0
Refunds o f V AT credits 84 Exceptional financing 22.1
AfDB b udget support (PARPAC) 17.9
Net cash outflow t o C orrespondents 19.7
/DB funding (CAS Reconstrocfion) 4.2
.
TOTAL 1 577.7 TOTAL 1 577.7
SECTION SEVENTY-SEVEN: During the 2 024 financial year, t he M inister o f F inance s hall b e
authorized to actively m anage the d ebt a nd cash s ituation, i n p articular through the repurchase,
exchange o r e arly r epayment of s ecurities issued a nd t he u se of risk hedging instruments.
www.prc.cm
SECTION S EVENTY-EIGHT: D uring t he 2024 f inancial year, t he Govemment s hall b e
authorized t o resort to domestic b orrowing, i n p articular t hrough government s ecurity
issues t o f inance d evelopment p rojects for a m aximum amount o f CFAF 375 b illion.
SECTION S EVENTY-NINE:
1 ) During the 2 024 financial year, t he Government shall b e a uthorized to negotiate and eventually
contract external loans under p roject l oans for a n a mount o f CFAF 9 50 billion under conditions
that safeguard the S tate's financial interests a nd its economic and political sovereignty.
2) l n net p resent v alue, t his e xternal debt c eiling a mounts t o CFAF 7 00 billion.
PARTlWO
PUBLIC P OLICY M EASURES A ND S PECIAL PROVISIONS
1. G ENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION E IGHTY: This Part p rovides f or a nd a uthorizes the means o f public p olicy
resources a ll ministries and i nstitutions for t he 2024 f inancial year.
PRESIDENT
Ofl NÿC1
EQDÿEÿLÿÿIÿt ÿ isê:rdÿ ::f7 P RES!
87
ISLAMIC A ND IRE
YAFFAIRSC ICE
ME
and


II. A PPROPRIATIONS
CHAPTER O NE:
GENERAL BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS
SECTION EIGHTY-ONE: The a mounts o f c ommitment authorizations a nd p ayment
appropriations under t he general b udget o pened f or t he p rogrammes contributing to
achieving the o bjectives with i ndicators s hall be as f ollows:
(ln t housands of C FA francs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
HEAD 01 - PRESIDENCY OF T HE REPUBLIC 55 3 33 0 00 55 3 33 0 00
FORMULATION AND Contribute to achieving t he Rate of a chievement of 21459760 2159760 4
1 168 COORDINATION O F objectives o f the G reater actions approved by t he
PRESIDENTIAL A CTION Accomplishments President of t he R epublic
Our Proara
7 918 493 7 918 4 93
PRESIDENTIAL Preserve t he i ntegrity of
Overall l evel o f achievement of
2 169 PROTECTION A ND the n ational t erritory a nd
the m ission o bjectives
TERRITORY I NTEGRITY p olitical s tability
GOVERNANCE A ND 25 9 54 7 47 25 9 54 7 47
w INSTITU w TIONAL l mprovwe service .prc.cm
SUPPORT O F T HE coordination a nd e nsure Overall r ate o f achievement of
3 170
PRESIDENCY O F T HE p roper p rogramme budgeted activities
REPUBLIC A ND ITS implementation
ATTACHED S ERVICES
HEAD 02- SERVICES ATTACHED T O THE PRESIDENCY 8 060 000 8 060 0 00
FORMULATION A ND Contribute t o achieving t he Rate o f achievement of 111 7 729 1117 729
4 171 COORDINATION O F objectives o f the G reater actions a pproved by t he
PRESIDENTIAL A CTION Accomplishments President of the R epublic
Programme
Contribute ta the 6942 2 71 6 942 2 71
PRESIDENTIAL Overall l evel o f achievement o f
5 172 PROTECTION AND preservation of the i ntegrity of the o bjectives assigned t a t he
TERRITORY I NTEGRITY the n ational t erritory a nd missions
political s tabilitv
HEAD 03- NATIONAL ASSEMBL Y
29 6 22 000 29 6 22 0 00
STRENGTHENING 11 1 40 0 00 11140000
PARLIAMENTARY Contribute t o enhancing Rate o f contrai t he
6 174 CONTROL O F the e fficiency of public Government's priority
GOVERNMENTAL policies investment programme
ACTION
18 4 82 0 00 18 4 82 0 00
GOVERNANCE A ND Rate o f contribution o f the
7 175 INSTITUTIONAL Strengthen t he n ational N A t o strengthening t he n ational
SUPPORT OF N ATIONAL l egislative f ramework legislative framework
ASSEMBLY S ERVICES
HEAD 04- PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE
22 0 63 720 22400 000
lmprove t he administrative, 2589 3 80 2589380
economic a nd f inancial
governance of p ublic
policies, t o e nsure the
GUIDANCE A ND structural t ransformation o f
COORDINATION O F the e conomy, the Rate o f timely
8 010
GOVERNMENTAL development of h um a n responsiveness
ACTION capital and w ell-being, and
the p romotion o f
employment a nd e conomic
inclusion, i n l ine with the r-
NDS30.
PRESIDENCYOF T HE REPUBLIC
_ -
· PRESIOENCY OF THc .. - -
sÿ--... ,,,,.. ,. G.. ENERAI.
--~ n-ÿ 8 8
... 1 ri1,HIERLEGISLATIFETRJ ' MENTARY
/- S~EoR.Vs- _I- C= LEA .- T ,I.V.... ~ -.,. Wlffi>RY-ÿFAIRS CAR (cid:127) l tiOEX
-;-rÿt'IE CERTIFIEE COlÿFORME
...
CERTIFIED T RUEJt:OPY


(ln thousands o f C FA francs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
15 7 47 2 98 16 0 83 5 78
GOVERNANCE AND
lmprove the o perational
INSTITUTIONAL
coordination o f s ervices
SUPPORT TO THE Rate of i mplementation of
and ensure the p roper
9 011 INTERNAL AND budgeted a ctivities at t he
implementation o f
ATTACHED S ERVICES PMO
TO P RIME MINISTER'S p rogrammes i n the P rime
Minister's O ffice
OFFICE
3 7 27 0 42 3 7 27 0 42
Proportion of e vents
supervised by t he P rime
10 204 S P T O R L A IC T Y E G CO IC O A R N D D IN ATION O co p o ti r m di z n e a t t h io e n s o tr f a tegic and policy e M c i o n n is o t m er i c c o i n n f t l r u ib e u n t c i e n g o u t o t o f a il
Governmental a ction
events contributing to
economic i nfluence
HEAD 05- ECONOMIC A ND S OCIAL C OUNCIL S trengthèn t he 1 9 51 0 00 1 9 51 0 00
participation o f 80 0 00 80 0 00
ADVICE TOTHE
XECUTIF O N the various socio-professional I
categories i n t he
1 1 095 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, preparation and Number o f o pinions i ssued by
CULTURAL A ND the ESC
implementation
ENVIRONMENTAL
of public oolicies. lmprove
ISSUES
the
GOVERNANCE A ND · coordination o f services a nd 1 8 71 0 00 1 8 71 0 00
INSTITUTIONAL ensure the Rate o f c ompletion of activities b udgeted within
12 096 SUPPORT O F THE programmes o f the E SC ESC the p roper implementation o f the
ECONOMIC AND
SOCIAL C OUNCIL
HEAD 06- MINISTRY OF E XTERNAL RELATIONS 41575000 41676000
17 9 72 2 74 17 9 72 2 74
www.pr1. N cumber o f l eg.al b ilatceral m
cooperation instruments
being f inalized;
Capitalize on the p otential
DEVELOPMENT O F THE of b ilateral relations for t he 2. N umber o f l egal b ilaleral
13 087 POTENTIAL O F cooperation instruments
benefit of C ameroon's
BILATERAL R ELATIONS finalized
diplomatie e mergence.
3.Number o f p artners
mobilized a nd projects
. -
initiated or i mplemented
4451122 4451122
1.Number o f a greements,
projects, programmes and
mechanisms o blained and
NEGOTIATION, implemented through
COORDINATION A ND Diversify a nd increase t he multilateral, d ecentralized o pportunities
MONITORING O F of and n on-governmental multilateral, d ecentralized c ooperation
MULTILATERAL, and n on-governmental 2.Number o f p rojects and
14 088 DECENTRALIZED,
NON-GOVERNMENTAL cooperation f or programmes obtained a nd/or
COOPERATION A ND Camweroon's implemented b y M INREX f or
SUBSEQUENT development the b enefit of C ameroon
PROGRAMMES within t he f ramework o f
multilateral, d ecentralized
and non-governmental
cooperation
6 1 38 7 62 6 1 38 7 62
1.Number o f r eturned a nd
reintegrated m igrants
Stepping u p t he 2. Annual n umber of participation o f
projects/or
MANAGEMENT OF T HE initiatives o f Cameroonians a broad in
cameroonians abroad the
DIASPORA, MIGRANTS development of already
15 089 supported3. Number
AND E MERGING Cameroon and c ontributing o f effective
CRISES mechanisms for t o the management of the management o f
emerging crises m igration
issues to which Cameroon is
a p arty
I
(cid:127)
PRESIDENCY OF
PRESIDE
89
t .. ERVICE
RME p y
'


(ln t housands of C FA f rancs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INNOVATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
13 012 842 13 012 8 42
GOVERNANCE A ND
lmprove t he coordination
INSTITUTIONAL of services and ensure t he Rate o f c ompletion of
16 0 90 SUPPORT IN OF T HE MINREX's b udgeted
EXTERNAL R ELATIONS' proper implementation activities
SUB-SECTOR MINREX's P rogrammes
HEAD 07- MINISTRY OF T ERRITORIAL A DMINISTRATION 4 1 0 79 000 40 63 4 0 00
8 0 46 995 8 0 46 995
Proportion o f r eports o f t ours
lncrease t he
17 161 TERRITORIAL resentativeness o f carried o ut submitted by t he
ADMINISTRATION administrative a uthorilies
territorial administration
during t he year
2 0 63253 2 063253
CONTRIBUTING T O T HE
PROMOTION OF C IVIL
Ensure compliance with Proportion of c ivil society
FREEDOMS A ND T HE
18 162 regulations on individual organizations m onitored per
SECURITYOF
and collective f reedoms year
PERSONS A ND
PROPERTY
2 4 52 100 2 4 52 100
DEVELOPMENT O F T HE
Number o f d ivisions w ith
19 163 NATIONAL C IVIL Build d isaster r esilience
PROTECTION S YSTEM Emergency Response P lans
28 516 652 28 071 6 52
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
To ensure t he o ptimal Rate o f i mplementation o f
SUPPORT IN THE
20 164 TERRITORIAL implementation of t he budgeted activities w ithin the
ADMINISTRATION S UB- . M inistry's Programmes Ministry
SECTOR
HEAD 08- MINISTRY OF JUSTICE 66 3 88 000 69 30 8 0 00
www.pr 1.P c roportion o f . c ases cm31 508 434 34 428 434
handled w ithin a reasonable
IMPROVEMENT OF lmprove t he quality a nd time l imit
21 050 equal access to t he p ublic
COURT A CTIVITY 2.CFI c overage rate
service o f justice
3.Proportion of m agistrates
with work o verload
lmprove detention 22 894 1 27 22 894 127
22 051 IMPROVEMENT OF conditions a nd p romote t he P roportion o f p risoners trained f or
PENITENTIARY P OLICY social reintegration o f d etainees reintegration
Ensure the e ffectiveness 11985439 11985 439
GOVERNANCE A ND and e fficiency of s ervices
lmplementation rate o f
INSTITUTIONAL for t he optimal
23 0 52 budgetary a ctivities i n t he
SUPPORT OF T HE implementation o f t he
Ministry o f J ustice
JUSTICE S UB-SECTOR Programmes o f the
Ministry of J ustice
HEAD 0 9- SUPREME COURT 5 4 27 000 5 4 27 000
890 185 890 1 85
CONTROL OF T HE
FINANCIAL
TRANSPARENCY O F S trengthen t he contrai a nd judgment of p ublic
Rate o f j udicial r eview
24 114 BUDGET A RY
carried o ut
MANAGEMENT A ND a ccounts
THE QUALITY O F
PUBLIC A CCOUNTS
471 0 00 471 0 00
MANAGEMENT O F lmprove performance o f t he Rate of d ecisions r endered i n
25 115 JUDICIAL AND Supreme Court i n judicial and a dministrative
ADMINISTRATIVE Judicial and A dministrative
matters
DISPUTES matters
4 065 815 4 0 65 815
GOVERNANCE A ND Ensure o ptimal
Rate o f i mplementation o f
26 188 INSTITUTIONAL implementation o f budgeted activities w ithin the
SUPPORT O F T HE Supreme Court
Supreme Court
SUPREME C OURT programmes
HEAD 10- MINISTRY OF P UBLIC CONTRACTS 14 773 000 14773 000
PRESIDENT
PRES
90
LATIF AND RME
TORY A FFAIRS C
ERTIFlÿi(cid:127)::8
-.:=-=:PY ........ ;.,;;;;;.;.;S..E:.R;;V,;,I.C.;E:. , A:REA ___


(ln thousands o f C FA f rancs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
2577 800 2 5 77 800
PUBLIC C ONTRACTS Ensure t he proper Proportion o f c ontracts
27 027 SYSTEM functioning o f t he public awarded through t he mutual
ADMINISTRATION c ontracts s ystem agreement procedure
2 039 850 2 0 39 850
PROGRAMI\AING A ND Ensure t he programming
28 028 MONITORING O F and a p roper a ward o f Proportion o f e xecuted
programmed c ontracts
PUBLIC C ONTRACTS p ublic c ontracts
1 865 4 52 1865 452
PUBLIC C ONTRACTS Proportion o f c ontracts
29 029 EXECUTION EXTERNAL Ensure t he q uality o f having b een e xecuted in
CONTROL services p rovided compliance with technical
specifications
8 289 898 8 2 89 898
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
30 030 SUPPORT IN THE lmprove s ervice Rate of c ompletion of
PUBLIC C ONTRACTS performance budgeted activities
SUB-SECTOR
HEAD 1 1 - SUPREME S TATE AUDIT OFFICE 6 1 27 000
_.
949000 949 00 0
Number of g ovemment
I
STRENGTHENING T. HE Promote t he culture of services a nd o ther S tate
31 067 PREVENTION O F THE good g ovemance i n the entities t hat h ave intemalized
MISAPPROPRIATION O F m anagement of p ublic internai c ontrai s tandards
PUBLIC F UNDS affairs and m easures to prevent
breaches t o public f unds
Sanction unscrupulous 1829000 1829000
1.Number of entities
managers, r epairing
controlled a nd audiled
32 076 w CONTRwOL, A UDITS A NwD damage e ndur.ed b y p the r 2.P c roportion o . f c ase c s m
SANCTIONS State, monitor t he
examined b y the C DBF p er
sanctions i mposed b y
CDBF year
.
3 349 000 3 3 49000
GOVERNANCE A ND ensuré t he é ffeètivé
33 077 INSTITUTIONAL implementation of Rate of c ompletion of
budgeted activities
CONSUPE S UPPORT CONSUPE p rograms
HEAD 12- GENERAL D ELEGATION O F N ATIONAL SECURITY 105 116 000
Strengthen the protection 21215 0 35 21 2 15 035
34 062 STRENGTHENING of i nstitutions, p ublic Security coverage rate o f t he
PUBLIC S ECURITY freedoms, persons a nd national t erritory
properties
4285 3 00 4285 300
Proportion o f c riminal acts
STRENGTHENING
35 063 BORDER SECURITY lncrease border s ecurity and cross-border offences
brought u nder control
6 131 410 6131 410
Provide a uthorities w ith I
36 064 REVITALIZING T HE information f or d ecisions Number of s ecurity briefs
INTELLIGENCE SYSTEM produced
making
73 4 84255 73 4 84255
GOVERNANCE A ND lmprove t he c oordination
INSTITUTIONAL of s ervices a nd ensure t he Rate of c ompletion o f
37 065 SUPPORT WITHIN T HE smooth i mplementation o f b D u G d S g N eted a ctivities a t t he
DGSN programmes
HEAD 1 3- MINISTRY OF D EFENCE 324 024125 324 338 000
143 025 910 143264485
Rate of i mplementation o f
DEFENCE O F NATIONAL Strengthen measures t o
the staffing t able a nd general
38 001 TERRITORIAL guarantee territorial
staffing state o f t he Armed
INTEGRITY integrity
Forces
81 7 42 162 81817 462
INVOLVEMENT I N
ENSURING T HE
Guarantee c onditions of
PROTECTION OF Crime r ate a ssessed by the
39 003 PEOPLE PROPERTY security and peace National G endarmerie
conducive t o d evelopment
AND THE
ENVIRONMENT
- -
PAESIDEN
PR ~ .. D 91
GISLATIF E IRE
ÿÿÿ't'\-.:rœÿ;'STÿ AT C E CERTÿ
ÿJ
ê
J
E
lQ
c
R
R
Y
T
A
IF
F
IE
FA
D
I R S
ERVICr
TAU ftÿ'VfE


(ln t housands of CFA f rancs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
N"
CODE DRAGONELLE
41676514 41676514
ASSISTANCE, l mprove the follow-up,
Number of ex-servicemen
RECONVERSION A ND reconversion a nd
and War v ictims o r their
40 004 REINTEGRATION O F reintegration o f e x-
EX-SERVICEMEN AND servicemen a nd w ar successors s upported o r
assisted
VICTIMS O F W AR ( EVW) viclims
PARTICIPATING I N lmprove MINDEF's s upport in Rate of completion of various 10 1 9 0 709 10 19 0 709
NATIONAL specific areas
41 005 DEVELOPMENT contributing to the socio- s in u f b ra m s i t t r t u e c d t u t o r a M l I r N eq D u E e F s ts
ACTIVITIES economic d evelopment of entities
Cameroon
47 3 88 830 47 388 8 30
GOVERNANCE A ND lmprove service
INSTITUTIONAL c oordination and e nsure Execution rate of budgeted
42 006
SUPPORT T O T HE t he proper i mplementation a D c e t f i e v n it c ie e s in t he Ministry o f
DEFENCE SUB-SECTOR of M INDEF p rogrammes
HEAD 1 4- MINISTRY OF A RTS AND C UL T URE 6 3 58 000 6 3 68 0 00
1 568000 1568000
PRESERVATION O F Reconstitute and Number o f viable and
43 148 CAMEROONIAN'S A RT s afeguard t he cultural and operational cultural
AND C ULTURE properties a nd e leamrteisnttisc heritage.
Promote t he emergence of a 19 4 4 4 00 1 944 4 00
DEVELOPMENT AND Number of activities c arried
commercial organized a nd
PROMOTION OF T HE out t o promote the
44 149 PRODUCTION O F competitive c ultural s ector production a nd consumption
that g enerates i ncome
CULTURAL GOODS AND and c reates of cultural goods a nd
SERVICES services
sustainable j obs
2 8 45 600 2 845 6 00
GOVERNANCE AND
INSTITUTIONAL Ensure the effective
45 182 SUPPORT O F T HE implementation o f the Rate of completion of
www.prbucdgeted activ.ities inc M INAC m
MINISTRY OF A RTS A ND Ministry's Programmes
CULTURE
HEAD 15- MINISTRY O F B ASIC E DUCATION 290843 000 289 6 43 0 00
21542 9 03 21542 903
DEVELOPMENT OF lncrease pre-school
46 101 PRE-SCHOOL enrollrnent r ate across the Gross pre-school e nrolment
rate
ACTIVITIES national territory
lmprove access to and 224 067 299 222 8 67 2 99
1. Primary s chool completion rate
UNIVERSALIZATION O F completion o f quality and 2.
47 102 PRIMARY E DUCATION i a n ll c c lu h s il i d ve re p n r l o m f a s r c y h e o d o u l- c a a i: t 1 io e n for Net p rimary education
enrollment r ate
4 638 881 4 638 8 81
lncrease the percentage o f percentage o f literate l iterate
48 103 LITERACY population i n C AF, population i n C AFs, CEBNFs
CEBNF and CPLN and CPLNs
40 5 939 17 40 593 9 17
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL Ensure the e ffective Average r ate of achievement
49 104 SUPPORT O F T HE implementation o f of operational programme operational
BASIC E DUCATION programmes indicators
SUB-SECTOR
HEAD 1 6- MINISTRY O F S PORTS AND P HYSICAL EDUCATION 24 7 99 000 24 799 0 00
5 999 589 5 999 5 89
lncrease the healthy,
Number o f participants i n
PROMOTION OF
60 007 PHYSICAL E DUCATION m pr e a t c h t o ic d e i c o a f l P a h n y d s s ic u a p l e a r n v d is e d PSA p romotion a nd
popularization a ctivities
Sports A ctlvitles (PSA)
119 59 8 00 11959 800
lmprove Cameroon·s
international i nfluence Number o f sports f ederations
PROMOTION O F
51 008 through s ports a nd the eligible for national
SPORTS
governance of the national c ompetitions sporting
movement
PRESIDENCY
PRES Ti.i.tÿrm'i'i5":"":"r""-,
TIF
92
RY AFFAIRS ICE
IFEE C ME
·TRU PY


(ln thousands of C FA francs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
N the
CODE DRAGONELLE
6 8 3 9611 6 83 9 611
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
Ensure e ffective Rate o f c ompletion of
SUPPORT IN THE
52 009 implementation of M INSEP b udgeted a ctivities i n the
SPORTS A ND P HYSICAL
programmes Ministry
EDUCATION S UB
SECTOR
HEAD 1 7- MINISTRY OF C OMMUNICATION 5 8 41 000 5 841 000
lncrease national coverage o f 1478000 1478000
INCREASE O F information by p ublic
53 013 POPULATION A CCESS a nd private m edia in Coverage r ate
TO MEDIA C ONTENT q ualitative a nd quantitative tenns
1635000 1635000
lncrease t he a vailability o f
DEVELOPMENT O F i nstitutionali2ed i nformation S OCIETAL for
people's a ccess t o PERFORMANCE-BASED basic s ocial Percentage o f t he population aware
of t he use of b asic social
54 097 services a s MUL TISECTOR well a s the a vailability o f
COMMUNICATION t h.e said information t o t he p ublic services to i mprove o n t heir living
concemed conditions
2 7 28 000 2 728 000
GOVERNANCE A ND lmprove t he coordination o f
INSTITUTIONAL services a nd e nsure the Rate o f c ompletion o f p roper
55 160 SUPPORT I N THE implementation o f b udgeted activities w ithin the
COMMUNICATION S UB- programmes in the Ministry M inistry o f C ommunication
SECTOR of Communication
HEAD 1 8- MINISTRY OF H IGHER E DUCATION 80 085 000 80 0 85 000
17 807 587 17 8 07 587
wDEVELOwPMENT OF T HEw lncrease the n um.ber a npd rc.cm
Percentage of s tudents
TECHNOLOGICAL A ND quality of s tudents t rained
trained in technological and
56 116 VOCATIONAL in technological and
vocational Higher Education
COMPONE NT OF vocational Higher Institutions
HIGHER E DUCATION. Education I nstitutions
9 8 59 800 9 859 800
1.Annual r ate of s upervision
Provide professional skills o f s tudent at Master's l evel 2 .Rate o f
MODERNIZA T ION A ND a nd c ompetences t o professional
PROFESSIONALIZA T ION students i n mainstream OF integration o f s tudents
57 117
MAINSTREAM f aculties t o enable t hem gain e mployment o r t o trained in mainstream
FACULTIES be faculties
3.Number o f students p seerl f -employed
seat
22 504 9 41 22 5 04 9 41
Enable university research N umber of u niversity r esearch
DEVELOPMENT OF
positive i mpact o n t he findings used in the to h ave a
UNIVERSITY
58 118 country's p riority s ectors defined i n the development s trategy p er
RESEARCH A ND
achieve its emergence year. development i n order to
INNOVATION
29 912 672 29 9 12 6 72
GOVERNANCE A ND lmprove s ervice
INSTITUTIONAL coordination a nd e nsure Rate of c ompletion o f
59 119 SUPPORT IN THE proper i mplementation o f b udgeted activities at
HIGHER EDUCATION higher education MINESUP
SUB-SECTOR programmes
HEAD 19- MINISTRY O F S CIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND I NNOVATION 14 871 000 14 8 71 000
7 5 08 8 44 7 508 8 44
GOVERNANCE A ND
lmprove t he c oordination,
INSTlTUTIONAL
functioning and
SUPPORT TO THE Rate of i mplementation o f t he
60 136 performance o f t he
RESEARCH A ND Ministry's a ction p lan
Research and I nnovation s ub-
INNOVATION S UB-
sector
SECTOR
P RE ANDD
ENCE YOU ,;-ÿ-ÿtÿh--e-
P RE St THEENcv - (cid:127)Hÿ RE 93
S
TO BE\' AT G ENERA
ICHIER - ---ÿARI = fl:E- P ·ÿ UH BEt RE!
-ÿ - -CERTIFIED PIE C 6ÿ ÿ DEXSfRVICf /
ÿ CERT11:11:"" --·-- WORM= ÿ


(ln thousands o f CFA f rancs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INNOVATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
7 362156 7 362156
INTENSIFICATION O F
61 193 RESEARCH - s ln c c ie r n ea ti s fi e c , t h t e e c p h e n r o fo lo r g m ic a a n l c a e n o d f Number o f research findings
DEVELOPMENT AND produced a nd d isseminated
innovation r esearch
INNOVATION
HEAD 20- MINISTRY O F F INANCE 66 363 000 66 363 000
MOBILIZATION O F lmprove n on-oil r evenue 10 476 751 10 476 751
Rate of collection of
62 031 DOMESTIC N ON-OIL collection a nd t he business
domestic tax r evenue
REVENUE climate
11225 6 86 11225 686
CUSTOMS
1. Rate o f i nterception o f
GOVERNANCE,
Facilitate f oreign t rade a nd s trategic goods c irculating in
PROTECTION O F THE
63 032 contribute t o n ational C ameroon s ecurity
ECONOMIC S PACE A ND
2. Rate o f d ernaterialisation of customs revenue
PARTICIPATION I N
NATIONAL S ECURlîY
12 770 828 12 770 828
1. Average t ime t aken t o pay
MANAGEMENT OF THE l mprove t he e fficiency o f
expenditure a lter i t h as b een
64 33 PUBLIC TREASURY A ND t he T reasury and o ptimise processed by t he Treasury.
MONITORING O F THE t he f inancihg o f t he 2.Share of credit t o the
FINANCIAL S ECTOR economy
econorny i n G DP
Ensure t he adequate 14 419 192 14 419 192
1 .Average t ime t aken t o
65 34 MANAGEMENT O F THE p B r i e ll p a a n ra d t i t o h n e o ef f f t ic h i e e n F t i n ance process e xpenditure f iles
STATE BUDGET 2.Level of compliance with
execution of the budgets o f
budget d eadlines
public e ntities
GOVERNANCE A ND Ensure t he optimal Rate of completion of 17 470 544 17 470 544
66 92 INSTITUTIONAL implementation of the budgeted activities within t he
SUPPORT Ministry's Programmes Ministry
www.prc.cm -· - --
HEAD 21 - MINISTRY O F C OMMERCE 9 0 02 000 9 0 02 000
498 458 498 458
Proportion of products
SUPPORT FOR T HE Contribute t o improving t he marketed a broad out o f the total
67 016 DEVELOPMENT O F competitiveness o f "made in number o f products s ubject
EXPORTS Carneroon" p roducts o n export to MINCOMMERCE supervision
markets
Ensure r egular s upplies t o 3 800 047 3 800 047
68 021 REGULATION O F THE t he d omestic market under C onsumer p roduct price
DOMESTIC M ARKET c onditions o f fair i ndex competition l mprove t he
coordination
3 9 13 209 3 9 13 209
of services and e nsure
GOVERNANCE A ND
69 025 INSTITUTIONAL Rate of implementation of
proper implementation o f budgeted activities programmes
SUPPORT
790 286 790 286
PROMOTION OF
METROLOGY,
STANDARD G uarantee f airness i n S URVEILLANCE AND Rate of fairness i n
70 152
commercial activities. commercial t ransactions
SUPERVISION OF FAIR
PRICING
MINISTRY O F E CONOMY, PLANNING A ND REGIONAL
HEAD 2 2- 70 008 0 00 69 006 000
DEVELOPMENT
Ensure t he implementation of 46 588 022 45 585 022
the NDS30, f oster
STRATEGIC P LANNING
harmonious a nd
AND S USTAINABLE Rate of production o f reports and
71 019 sustainable d evelopment o f
REGIONAL strategic tools expected
the t erritory a nd
DEVELOPMENT
contribute to t he fight
aQainst povertv
I.
PRESIDENCY OF THE R EP
PRESSES
94
IRE
RVICE
RME
py


(ln t housands o f C FA francs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
N(cid:127)
CODE DRAGONELLE
12 4 89 5 84 12 489 584
SUPPORT FOR Contribute t o s tructural
72 022 STRUCTURAL t ransformation t o 1.PIB p hysical
TRANSFORMATION T O accelerate e conomic implementation rate
ACCELERATE GROWTH growth
3 048 7 40 3 048 740
lmprove t he alignment o f
STRENGTHENING the c ontributions of Annual rate of e xtemal
DEVELOPMENT economic partnerships a nd financing m obilized i n regional
73 023 PARTNERSHIP A ND integration t o the accordance w ith the terms a chievement of a nd
REGIONAL conditioM Mt o ut i n thê C ameroon's development Finance L aw.
INTEGRATION priorities
7 881 6 54 7 881 654
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL l mprove t he c oordination
SUPPORT F OR THE of s ervices a nd provide Rate of c ompletion o f
74 024 ECONOMY, P LANNING a ssistance f or the budgeted a ctivities within
AND R EGIONAL execution o f operational M INEPAT p rogrammes
DEVELOPMENT SUB-
SECTOR
HEAD 23- MINISTRY O F TOURISM AND LEISURE 8 515 0 00 8 515 000
75 014 PROMOTION OF Attract i nternational and Number o f i nternational 13840 9 8 1 3840 98
TOURISM A ND LEISURE l ocal visitors visitors
3 605 4 50 3605 450
DIVERSIFICATION A ND
STRENGTHENING O F lncrease t he supply o f
Value a dded o f t he tourism and
76 150 TOURISM AND L EISURE t ourism and l eisure
leisure s ector
FACILITIES A ND products and services
SERVICES
3 52 5 452 3 52 5 452
wGOVERwNANCE A ND w.prc.cm
INSTITUTIONAL lmprove t he c oordination o f Rate of implementation of
77 151 SUPPORT IN THE services and e nsure t he programmed a nd budgeted
TOURISM A ND L EISURE p roper implementation o f activities
programmes
SUB S ECTOR
HEAD 25- MINISTRY OF S ECONDARY EDUCATION 639242 000 539 2 42 000
120 5 85 3 00 120 5 85 300
IMPROVEMENT OF
ACCESS T O lncrease a ccess t o Primary t o secondary school
78 105 SECONDARY secondary e ducation transition r ate (including f or girls
and boys)
EDUCATION
264 8 33 9 69 264833 9 69
IMPROVEMENT O F THE
QUALITY O F
lmprove the q uality o f
EDUCATION A ND
79 106 SCHOOL LIFE I N THE teaching a nd leaming i n Rate of completion o f f irst the
Ministry o f Secondary and second c ycle
SECONDARY
Education
EDUCATION S UB-
SECTOR
53818731 53 818 731
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
SUPPORT I N THE lmprove g ovemance and Rate of i mplementation of
80 107 SECONDARY optimal management o f programmed a ctivities at
resources MINESEC
EDUCATION S UB-
SECTOR
100 0 0 4 000 100 00 4 000
STRENGTHENING
PROFESSIONALISA T ION
lncrease the v ocational
AND OPTIMISING
skills o f t echnical a nd Percentage of l eamers by
81 112 TRAINING IN THE
vocational secondary gender i n promising s ectors
SECONDARY
school l earners
EDUCATION S UB-
SECTOR
HEAD 26- MINISTRY O F YOUTH AFFAIRS AND C IVIC E DUCATION 27 086 0 00 27 086 000
... PRESIDENCE O ..
PRESI
,
95
AIR
SERVICE
ORME
OPY


(ln t housands of CFA f rancs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
7 2 68 338 7 2 68 338
1. P roportion o f the
population t hat h as a cquired
lnstil c ivic, m oral and civic b ehavior
CIVIC E DUCATION A ND
82 144 VOLUNTEERISM ethical values i n t he 2. N umber of people t rained
population in c itizenship v alues b y
MINJEC's s upervisory
structures.,
lncrease t he e conomic 10 5 10 425 10 5 10 425
SOCIO-ECONOMIC Rate of econornic i ntegration of
83 145 INTEGRATION O F t i r n a t i e n g e r d a t i i n o n M o IN f J y E o C un g people young people t rained in
YOUTHS structures MINJEC training structures
3705604 3 7 05604
1. N urnber of people t rained on
NATIONAL republican values ( liVing
Reinforce r epublican
84 146 C IN IT T I E Z G E R N A TION A ND values a mong t he t d o e g v e e t l h o e p r m a e n n d t ) p articipation in
PARTICIPATION population 2. P roportion o f population
with r epublican s kills
5 601 6 33 5 6 01 633
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL l rnprove t he c oordination Rate of cornpletion o f
85 147 SUPPORT T O T HE of services a nd ensure the b udgeted activities within t he
MINISTRY O F' Y OUTH p roper implementation o f Ministry of Youth Affairs a nd
AFFAIRS A ND C IVIC programmes Civic Education
EDUCATION
MINISTRY OF D ECENTRALIZATION A ND L OCAL
HEAD 27 - 100 052 336 100 0 52 3 36
DEVELOPMENT
3 632820 3 6 32820
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
Ensure effective
wSUPPOwRT I N T HE w.prRacte of implem.entaliocn of m
86 098 DECENTRALIZATION implementation o f budgeted a ctivities in t he
MINDDEVEL's
AND LOCAL Ministry
Programmes
DEVELOPMENT S UB-
SECTOR
21293922 21293 922
STRENGHTENING T HE Strengthen t he Number of councils w hose
87 099 DECENTRALIZATION a dministrative a nd financial financial r esources i ncrease
PROCESS autonomy of R LAs by a t least 5% per y ear
75125 594 75125 594
Promote t he contribution o f Rate of physical a nd
PROMOTION O F L OCAL
88 100 RLAs to economic g rowth financial i mplementation o f
DEVELOPMENT
and local d evelopment RLA investment projects
MINISTRY O F ENVIRONMENT NATURE PROTECTION AND
HEAD 28- , 8 631 000 8 491 0 00
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPM ENT
3600 0 00 3 6 00000
Reduce t he v ulnerability o f 1.Level of adaptation a nd C LIMATE
CHANGE, people's development r esilience o f development
89 002 DESERTIFICATION A ND a ctivities t o the a dverse sectors t o climate c hange
DROUGHT e ffects of climate c hange, 2 . Rate of land restored in
desertification a nd d rought priority intervention a rea 1
Ensure the monitoring a nd 694000 694000
promotion o f conservation, C hanges i n the biodiversity s tatus
sustainable u se, of ecosystems,
90 069 BIODIVERSITY
enhancement of species a nd genetic r estoration and
resources
Biodiversity
1 218 500 1 2 18 500
1. N umber o f development
projects a nd p rogrammes
integrating environmental
Promote t he integration of issues i n t heir d rafting and
91 091 SUSTAINABLE sustainable developrnent i mplementation;
DEVELOPMENT into projects and 2 . N umber of development
programmes in C ameroon initiatives p romoting t he
consideration of
environmental a spects
supervised b y M INEPDED
96


(ln thousands o f CFA francs)
No Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
CODE J DRAGONELLE
1043000 1043000
1. Q uantity of hazardous
POLLUTION, waste m anaged in a n
NUISANCES A ND environmentally s ound
92 093 HARMFUL AND/OR Reduce e nvironmental manner
DANGER ROUS pollution and nuisances 2. Q uantity of hazardous
CHEMICAL waste m anaged in a n
SUBSTANCES environrnentally s ound
manner
20 7 5 5 00 1935500
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL lmprove service
coordination and ensure
SUPPORT T O THE
the proper i mplementation Rate o f implementation of
93 094 E N N A V T J U R R O E N P M R E O N T T E , C TION oftechnical p rogrammes of b udgeted a ctivities a t t he
Environment, N ature MINEPDED
AND S USTAINABLE
Protection and Sustainable
DEVELOPMENT SUB-
SECTOR Development s ub-sector
MINISTRY OF M INES, INDUSTRY A ND T ECHNOLOGICAL
HEAD 29- DEVELOPMENT 8 4 97 000 8 4 97 0 00
1404000 1 4 0 4 000
IMPROVEMENT OF THE
KNOWLEDGE OF 1. R ate o f k nowledge of t he
94 035 GEOLOGICAL Develop the m ining a nd geological p otential
POTENTIAL A ND THE q uarrying sector 2. P roportion o f o re
DEVELOPMENT OF reserves exploited
MINERAL R ESOURCES
1090 000 1090 000
DEVELOPMENT A ND l mprove the c ontribution o f
95 036 w INTENS w IFICATION O F the w m anufacturing s . ector prr R a a wc te m o a f t l e o r c ia a l l p . rocess c ing o f m
INDUSTRIAL S ECTORS t o the l ocal e conomy
12 5 5200 12 5 5200
Contribute t o t he
MODERNISATION O F
96 037 QUALITY improvement of t he Quality i nfrastructure
INFRASTRUCTURE technical competitiveness development i ndex o f the
local i ndustry
1 176100 1 1 76100
TECHNOLOGY 1. P roportion o f t echnologies
DEVELOPMENT AND Promote the d eveiopment mass-produced d uring t he
97 038 PROMOTION OF o v f a l t u e a c t h io n n o l o o f g i i n es d u a s n t d ri a th l e year
INDUSTRIAL P ROPERTY 2.Number o f i ndustrial
ASSETS property assets property assats v alued
3 571 7 00 3 5 71 700
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
SUPPORT IN T HE s lm er p v r i o ce v s e a th n e d c e o n o s r u d r i e n a th ti e o n p r o o f p er Rate o f completion of
98 039 MINING, I NDUSTRY A ND budgeted a ctivities i n
TECHNOLOGICAL implementation of MINMIDT
DEVELOPMENT MINMIDT programmes
SUBSECTOR
HEAD 3 0- MINISTRY O F A GRICULTURE AND RURAL D EVELOPMENT 113 1 01 0 31 113 1 01 0 31
56030542 56030542
PRODUCTIVITY A ND
99 184 PRODUCTION OF p ln r c o r d e u a c s t i i n o g n t o h f e t h an e n m u a a i l n Production g rowth rate for the
AGRICUL T URALS main a gricultural s ectors
crop s ectors
SECTORS
11042 250 110 42 2 50
1 . Proportion o f producers
I SUSTAINABLE who h ave adopted c limate
MANAGEMENT OF lmprove the sustainable change a daptation a nd
100 185 AGRICUL T URAL use of arable land a nd mitigation measures
PRODUCTION S YSTEMS reduce f ood i nsecurity 2.Proportion of the n ational
AND F OOD S ECURITY population a ffected by f ood '
insecurity (
28 8 86 092 28 8 86 0 92
-
P R f~ I Of AREP
97
PR NCY O FT HE R
SECRETARIAT GENE VICE OU
FICHI.ER l .EGISJ A T IF ET R I I ENTAIRE
L:::::;:µ&ÿÿÿllTS1ÿ™1fmAIRS C A E X SERVICE ~ f C ERTIFIED COPIES
CO OAMÿ


(ln thousands of C FA francs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
17 1 42 147 17 1 42 147
DEVELOPMENT OF
lmprove a ccess t o
AGRICUL T URAL, RURAL Proportion o f councils
101 186 INFRASTRUCTURES production infrastructure equipped w ith a new r ural mini
AND AGRICUL T URAL and a gricultural equipment in infrastructure p er year
rural a reas
MECHANIZATION
GOVERNANCE AND
INSTITUTIONNAL Ensure proper Rate o f c ompletion o f
102 187 A S G UP R P IC O U R L T T U I N R T E H A E N D i p m ro p g le r m am en m t e a s ti o i n n t o h f e M inis.. t ry of b M u in d i g s e tr t y e d o f a c A t g iv ri i c ti u e l s t u in re t h a e n d 58 5 91 860 58 5 91 860
RURAL D EVELOPMENT Agricultural a nd R ural Rural D evelopment
SUB-SECTOR development
MINISTRY OF L IVESTOCK, FISHERIES AND ANIMAL 38 0 50692 38 0 50692
HEAD 3 1 -
INDUSTRIES
DEVELOPMENT OF Ensure increase in the Growth rate o f t he p roduction of 5 792 782 5 7 92782
103 053 ANIMAL P RODUCTIONS p roduction o f a nimal meat e quivalent o f animal
AND INDUSTRIES p roducts products a nd c ommodities
8 250 065 8 2 50 065
Protect livestock from Proportion o f o utbreaks o f
!PROVEMENT O F T HE
SANITARY C OVERAGE O F animal diseases a nd diseases (animal a nd
104 055 improve t he sanitary zoonotic) s anitised in r elation t o
LIVESTOCK AND
ZOONOSES C ONTROL quality of f oodstuffs o f the number of reported and
animal a nd fish origin. confirmed outbreaks
DEVELOPMENT OF Ensure a growing a nd Rate of increase o f the 6 498 322 6498 3 22
106 057 FISHERIES sustainable production o f
quantities of f ishery products
PRODUCTIONS fisheries p roducts
lmprove c oordination of
wGOVERwNANCE A ND w.prc.cm
INSTITUTIONAL services a nd ensure Rate o f c ompletion o f
SUPPORT IN THE proper i mplementation o f budgeted a ctivities within t he p rogrammes
106 059 in the M inistry Ministry o f L ivestock, o f L ivestock, F isheries 319 233 000 317 758 000
LIVESTOCK. F ISHERIES A ND
and F isheries a nd Animal
ANIMAL I NDUSTRY S UB-
SECTOR Animal I ndustries Industries ( MINEPIA)
(MY P IA)
HEAD 3 2- MINISTRY OF W ATER RESOURCES AND ENERGY 210 932 810 210 932 810
34064601 34064 6 01
1. Available p ower (Mo/li)
Produce abundant e nergy to
2. Load f actor of i nstalled
improve people's q uality o f l ife,
107 016 ENERGY S UPPL Y support capacity ( %)
3. Volume of p etroleum
industrialization and
products, gas and b iofuels
become e lectricity exporter
available
lncrease a ccess t o e nergy 56 6 21 741 56 6 21 741
Rate o f a ccess t o e lectricity (%)
108 137 ACCESS TO E NERGY f or h ouseholds a nd i ndustries
17 6 13 848 16 1 38 848
1. Drinking w ater supply r ate
lmprove access to drinking
ACCESS T O D RINKING (in %)
109 138 WATER A ND LIQUIO water a nd l iquid sanitation for 2. Volume of water collected
households a nd
SANITATION 3. Coverage r ate o f improved on-
economic operators
site sanitation f acilities
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL lmprove service
110 139 SUPPORT I N THE coordination a nd e nsure Rate o f c ompletion of t he 20 2 48 0 00 20 2 48 0 00
proper i mplementation budgeted a ctivities of p rogrammes
WATER A ND ENERGY
SUB-SECTOR
3 552 375 3 5 52 375
HEAD 33- MINISTRY OF F ORESTRY A ND WILDLIFE
4 599 412 4 5 99 412
1.Surface a rea of m anaged
DEVELOPMENT AND
forests
RENEWAL OF Ensure s ustainable f orest
111 054 2.Resource g enerated b y
FORESTRY management
sustainable forest
RESOURCES l
management '
PRESID
p
98
ENTARY
X S ERVICE
ORME p y


(ln t housands o f CFA f rancs )
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
' -
2065 900 2 0 65 900
SECURING A ND Ensure sustainable 1.Number of protected a reas
under development
112 DEVELOPING W ILDLIFE management a nd
056 RESOURCES A ND d evelopment o f w ildlife a nd 2.Resources g enerated f rom
the m anagement of wildlife
PROTECTED AREAS protected areas
and protected a reas
10 030 313 10 0 30 313
1. Volume of legally eut
timber placed on t he m arket
OEVELOPMENT O r' 2.Ouanfüy of fuel-wood and
113 058 TIMBER A ND N ON- Optimise the u se of timber non-timber forest products and
TIMBER F OREST non-timber resources placed on t he m arket
RESOURCES 3.Number o f direct jobs i n
the t imber and non-timber
forest products industries
GOVERNANCE A ND lncrease a nd i mprove t he
institutional, technical and
INSTITUTIONAL
114 060 SUPPORT IN T HE operational c apacities of Rate of retum in the 29 5 43 500 28 4 20 7 00
FORESTRY AND development s takeholders implementation of a ctivities o f t he
WILDLIFE SUB-SECTOR forestry a nd w ildlife s ub-
sector (cid:127)
-
HEAD 35- MINISTRY OF EMPLOYMENT A ND V OCATIONAL T RAINING 2 9 15 350 2 9 15 350
~ I I 16 552 543 16 7 64 743 -
Promote d ecent
PROMOTION OF employment t hrough t he N umber o f j obs c reated a nd e xpansion
115 120 DECENT E MPLOYMENT and promotion i dentified through o f job c reation
AND JOB I NTEGRATION MINEFOP's e mployment
opportunities i n the p romotion initiatives e conomy
www.prc.cm
10 075 607 8 7 40 607
Develop the s kills of
Humber o f graduates f rom
people seeking vocational
public a nd private V TCs with
116 121 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT q ualifications o r r efresher
a v ocational q ualification
courses i n l ine w ith the
issued by M INEFOP
needs of t he e conomy
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL lmprove service
SUPPORT I N T HE coordination and ensure Rate o f c ompletion o f
117 122 EMPLOYMENT A ND the p roper implementation programmed a nd budgeted 643 745 000 569160 000
activities
VOCATIONAL T RAINING o f p rogrammes
SUB-SECTOR
HEAD 36- MINISTRY OF PUBLIC WORKS 388 719 377 348 519 377
238 758 626 204 3 73 626
CONSTRUCTION O F
118 125 ROADS AND OTHER Develop and u pgrade r oad Density of paved r oad
and crossing infrastructure network per 1000 inhabitants
INFRASTRUCTURE
2848 7 84 2 8 48 784
REHABILITATION,
MAINTENANCE AND
Restore and improve the Lineage of rehabilitated
119 126 UPKEEP OF R OADS
asphalt and earth n etwork asphalt n etwork
AND O THER
INFRASTRUCTURE
13 4 18 2 13 13 418 213
CONDUCT O F lmprove t he quality o f % o f studies carried out on
120 127 TECHNICAL studies to optimize the c ost time and in a ccordance w ith
INFRASTRUCTURE and quality o f infrastructure
the t echnical i tinerary
STUDIES works
GOVERNANCE A ND
121 128 INSTITUTIONAL Optimize t he s ervices Rate o f completion o f budget 20 2 86 000 20 2 86 0 00
provided activities
SUPPORT
MINISTRY OF STATE P ROPERTY, S URVEYS AND L AND 1 2 03 574 1 2 03 574
HEAD 37-
TENURE
~ . p-.
:ÿIQU
l..!E(THtJf A T CENE Q
~- FROM THE LEGISLATIVE FILE E tlltMSNf A fAE
ÿ U!ilSLAT(cid:127)vf t.u.f\ C hTll1'1\IV 'FFAIRS~ 1 ÿ ÿo , .. o ex SERVICE
- -ÿÿÿÿ_ç.ÿÿ!1.f~ lÿ! _ Ç ÿ ÿ,FORM


(ln t housands o f CFA f rancs)
No Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
CODE DRAGONELLE
Have a d igital land r egister 10 773 3 50 10 7 73 350
MODERNISATION O F that m eets the c hallenges P roportion of c ouncils w ith a
122 026
THE L AND REGISTRY o f m odern l and digital l and r egistry plan m anaoement
PROTECTION AND 1 3 94887 1 3 94887
lmprove t he management Proportion of a dministrative o f
123 061 DEVELOPMENT OF
STATE P ROPERTY State p roperty b uildings r ehabilitated
PROTECTION AND Proportion o f hectares o f 1 1 43 6 50 1 143 650
124 066 ENHANCEMENT O F lmprove the management land s ecured and incorporated
ESTATES of t he S tate into t he p rivate of e states domain
OPTIMIZA TION O F THE
125 068 MANAGEMENT O F L AND lmprove the management Average t ime to obtain a o f land
TENURE tenure land t itle a t the land r egistry
5 770539 5 7 70539
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL lmprove s ervice
SUPPORT IN THE coordination a nd e nsure Rate of c ompletion of
126 075 budgeted activities in
STATE PROPERTY, proper the implementation
MINDCAF
SURVEYS A ND LAND of p rogrammes
TENURE S UB-SECTOR
-HEAD 38- MINISTRY OF HOUSING A ND URBAN DEVELOPMENT 148498469 148498 4 69
DEVELOPMENT O F lmprove a ccess t o d ecent P roportion of h ouseholds l iving 35 300 0 02 35 3 00 002
127 108
HOUSING housing. in decent h ousing
2 4 10 3 8 7 2 4 10 387
Provide t he urban sub-
sector a nd RLAs with
Proportion of m unicipalities
IMPROVEMENT OF T HE a ppropriate u rban
128 109 URBAN SOCIAL management t ools o r whose management is
based o n a ppropriate urban
wENVIRwONMENT instrumwents and p romo.te s ocpial inclusionr c.cm
govèrnanœ tools
in u rban
areas
103 2 96 8 40 103296 840
DEVELOPMENT O F
TRANSPORT
lmprove m obility conditions
129 111 INFRASTRUCTURE A ND Length o f r oads c onstructed
in c ities.
SUSTAINABLE
MOBILITY
7 4 91 2 40 7 4 91 240
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL Ensure t he effec(cid:127) t ive Rate o f completion of
130 113 SUPPORT TO T HE implementation o f budgeted p rogramme
MINHDU p rograms activities
URBAN S UB-SECTOR
MINISTRY OF SMALL AND M EDIUM-SIZED
HEAD 3 9- 12 055 3 97 11 750 000
ENTERPRISES,SOCIAL ECONOMY AND H ANDICRAFT
2909562 2909562
1. P roportion o f S MESEHs
lncrease t he number o f created
PROMOTION OF
131 043 created a nd v iable 2. G rowth r ate of S MESEHs
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
SMESEHs supported f room
establishment
3230 4 00 3 2 30400
1. G rowth rate o f SMESEHs
TRANSFORMATION A ND lncrease t he production of
transformed a nd/or upgraded
132 044 MODERNISATION O F SMESEH i n t he secondary
2. P ercentage of SMESEHs
PRODUCTION P LANTS s ector
transformed a nd/or u pgraded
5 9 15 4 35 5 6 10 038
GOVERNANCE A ND Ensure o ptimal Rate of c ompletion of
133 167 INSTITUTIONAL implementation of t he budgeted activities within t he
SUPPORT Ministry's p rogrammes Ministry
HEAD 40- MINISTRY OF PUBLIC H EAL T H 263 0 72 820 255 281 0 00
50 819 6 37 50 8 19 637
Reduce p remature Percentage of L ong-Lasting
mortality from preventable l nsecticidal Nets (LLIN)
134 045 DISEASE PREVENTION
diseases by means of distributed among those
planned p revention
-
PRESIDENCE DE LA REPUBLIQUE _,;, j PRESIOENCV ÿ (cid:127) .. (cid:127) -: 1
- - ...
GENERI"'A I 100
ÿtTARIAT - ,vL, E,G_I S LATIVE A ND R ELATIVE Y ESTERDAY
AND S TATIJTOIIY E XPENSIVE AFFAIIIS D tY. SERVICE
ÿ ÿ
.a.r I
,/- LEGISLATIV'"E'' " -"' ,rn:.:E cor ORME
ÿ C ERTIFIED TRUE "OPY


(ln t housands o f C FA francs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
2 506 6 94 2 506 6 94
1 .Rate o f chronic
malnutrition in c hildren below
PROMOTION OF
135 046 HEALTH A ND Encourage t he population 5 years o f a ge to
NUTRITION adopt healthy b ehaviors 2 . P roportion o f H ealth
Districts ( HDs) i mplementing
TBCA
lncrease the i nstitutional 1. R ate of p eople covered b y a 95 961 9 33 88170113
capacity of h ealth social health p rotection
STRENGTHENING THE structures to e nsure system
136 047 HEAL TH CARE SYSTEM sustainable a nd e quitable 2 . P ercentage of d istricts
access o f p opulations to w ith h ealth s tructures that q uality
health c are a nd meet t he health n eeds o f t he s ervices population
1. Maternai mortality rate 2 . P ercentage of
59 8 11 3 06 59 8 11 3 06
Reduce mortality r ate to PLHIV o n
137 048 CASE MANAGEMENT b elow 70 p er 1 00 000
births treatment
53 973 2 50 53 9 73 2 50
GOVERNANCE A ND l mprove service STRATEGIC
coordination a nd ensure MANAGEMENT OF THE p roper Raie of completion of
138 049 activilies budgeted in budget
implementation o f H EAL TH SYSTEM t he M inistry's
programmes . programmes
HEAD 4 1 - MINISTRY OF L ABOUR A ND SOCIAL S ECURITY 7 289 0 00 7 289 0 00
965 0 00 965 0 00
Percentage of the e mployed
139 017 PROMOTION OF SOCIAL l mprove Social security population covered for at
SECURITY F OR ALL coverage i n C ameroon least l hree (3) different types o f
risks
2 658450 2658 450
1. P ercentage of w okers per
sex w hose c ompanies
www.prc.cm
140 018 D P E R C O E M N O T T W IO O N R O K F m lm e p c r h o a v n e i s h m ea s l t in h w a n o d rk s p a l f a e c t e y s c p o ri m nc p i l p y l e w s i t h decent wor'r<
2.Percentage of companies
applying decent work
principles
3 665 5 50 3 665 5 50
GOVERNANCE A ND l mprove service
INSTITUTIONAL coordination a nd ensure
141 159 SUPPORT OF THE the p roper implementation b R u a d te g e o t f e c d o a m c p ti l v e i t t i i o e n s o in f
LABOUR AND SOCIAL of p rogrammes i n t he MINTSS
SECURITY SUS- Ministry o f L abour and
SECTOR Social S ecurity
HEAD 42- MINISTRY OF S OCIAL A FFAIRS 20 614 0 00 20 6 14 000
3 058 0 50 3 058 0 50
SOCIAL P ROTECTION Ensure i nclusive a nd Percentage of c hildren, girls
142 070 OF THE CHILD adequate p rovision o f c hild and b oys, receiving quality
protection services social s ervices lncrease the
12 546 3 14 12 5 46 3 14
provision o f
SOCIAL P ROTECTION social p rotection s ervices
FOR GROUPS WITH to groups a nd communities A ccess r ate of SVPs to basic b ased
143 071 SPECIFIC on their specific social services ( by type o f
VULNERABILITY AND v ulnerabilities, p articularly area a nd by g ender)
NATIONAL SOLIDARITY in t he most d isadvantaged
areas
5 009 6 36 5 009 6 36
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL Ensure o ptimal
144 179 SUPPORT I N T HE implementation o f MINAS Rate of completion o f
budgeted activities in MINAS
SOCIAL AFFAIRS S UB- p rogrammes
SECTOR
HEAD 43- MINISTRY OF W OMEN'S EMPOWERMENT A ND THE F AMILY 9 563 5 20 9 5 63 520
32591'49 32591 4 9
1. R ate of w omen's a ctivity
145 140 WOMEN'S ECONOMIC Empower women 2. P ercentage of w omen
EMPOWERMENT economically assisted e conomically by
MINPROFF
\
PRESIDENCY O X fH.:PUÿÿiÔ_JE_
PA
101
·t
tATUtCRY A FFAI SERVICE
ORME
E CIR1'1,HÿE
RTtftlltD 1"R OPV


(ln t housands o f C FA f rancs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
1592045 1592045
1.Nurnber of wornen w ho are
discriminated against
SOCIAL PROMOTION OF 2. Number o f G ender - Based
146 141 WOMEN A ND G ENDER lmprove the status a nd Violence cases i dentified
condition of w ornen
ISSUES 3 .Rate of w omen's
representation in positions of
responsibility
1642463 1642463
1.Nurnber of children
registered a t the civil s tatus
registry w ith the support o f
Strengthen the s ocial r ole MINPROFF
FAMILY O EVELOPMENT
147 142 AND P ROTECTION OF of the f amily and t he 2. P ercentage of resolved protection o f
CHILDREN'S RIGHTS children's cases o f violence a mong
rights reported c ases
3. P roportion of couples w ho
have n ot d ivorced o ut of
couples a waiting divorce
INSTITUTIONAL 3 0 69863 3 069 8 63
148 143 SUPPORT A ND Strengthen govemance Rate of c ompletion of
GOVERNANCE and institutional c apacities b udgeted activities
HEAD 45- MINISTRY OF P OSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 15 0 86 000 15 086 000
1 286193 1 286193
NETWORK
INTENSIFICATION A ND
149 129 IMPROVEMENT O F lncrease a ccess to the Percentage o f p ostal o utlets
national p ostal n etwork. with an internet c onnection.
NATIONAL P OSTAL
COVERAGE
www.prc.cm
9489 3 64 9 4 89 364
DEVELOPMENT OF T HE l ncrease d igital
150 130 NATIONAL D IGITAL a ccessibility a nd p rornote I CT development i ndex (101)
ECOSYSTEM i ts u se.
3389 399 3 389399
GOVfRNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
SUPPORT OF T HE Ensure optimal Rate of completion of
151 131 MINISTRY O F P OSTS lrnplementation o f the budgeted activities i n the
AND Ministry's P rogrammes Ministry
TELECOMMUNICATION s
921 0 44 921 0 44
SECURING T HE
152 132 NATIONAL D IGITAL Ensure the s ecurity o f the National C ybersecurity n ational
ECOSYSTEM cyberspace. Index.
HEAD 4 6- MINISTRY O F T RANSPORT 97 444000 97 4 44000
6382 500 63 82500
DEVELOPMENT O F
163 163 ROAD TRANSPORT, lrnprove r oad t ransport Rate of accident reduction
INTERMODALITY A ND s upply and services
ROAD SAFETY
916 5 00 916 5 00
AIR TRANSPORT
lmprove a ir s ervice
154 154 C D I E V V IL E L A O V P IA M T E IO N N T AND provision, s ecurity a nd r F a r t e e i g ht t raffic developrnent
safety of civil a viation.
REGULATION
82850 0 00 82 850 0 00
DEVELOPMENT O F
lnerease the supply o f
MARITIME, RIVER A ND
maritime, r iver and l ake
166 155 LAKE TRANSPORT A S Port transit d eadlines
transport s ervices a s well as
WELL A S P ORT
ACTIVITIES port activities
3 352 0 00 3 3 52000
DEVELOPMENT OF R AIL l mprove rail transport 1. F reight traffic development r ate
156 156
TRANSPORT s upply and services
102


(ln thousands of CFA f rancs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
944500 944500
DEVELOPMENT A ND
MODERNIZA T ION OF
SYSTEMS F OR T HE lmprove t he production
157 157 COLLECTION, and d issemination of Production r ate of w eather
PRODUCTION AND meteorological reports
DISSEMINATION O F informations
METEOROLOGICAL
INFORMATION
2998 500 2 998 5 00
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL Ensure t he p roper Rate o f completion of
158 158 SUPPORT IN THE implementation of M INT budgeted activlties i n t he
TRANSPORT S UB programmes Ministry o f Transport
SECTOR
NATIONAL D ISARMAMENT, DEMOBILIZATION A ND
HEAD 48- 4 0 67 000 4 0 67 0 00
REINTEGRATION COMMITEE
744000 744000
lncrease the surrender o f B oko-
Number of f ighters who h ave
DISARMING O F Haram f ighters and a rmed
159 082 COMBATANTS AND groups in t he N orth West. a nd voluntarily l aid down their a rms
DEMOBILIZA T ION South West. r egions integrated into t he r egîonal
centres each year
772 000 772 0 00
lmprove t he holistic
wwwconversio.n (sociapl, rc.cm
160 083 REINTEGRATION O F economic, c ultural, Number of e x-combatants
EX-COMBATANTS religious, e tc.) a nd empowered
reîntegratîon o f ex-
combatants
2 5 51 0 00 2 551 0 00
GOVERNANCE AND
INSTITUTIONAL
SUPPORT TO THE l mprove c oordination of
Rate of i mplementation o f
NATIONAL services a nd e nsure
161 180 budgeted a ctivities .within the
DISARMAMENT, effective i mplementation of
Committee
DEMOBILIZA TION AND p rogrammes
REINTEGRATION
COMMITTEE
HEAD 49- CONSTITUTIONAL C OUNCIL 3 9 44 000 3 9 44 0 00
3944000 3 944000
GOVERNANCE AND Ensure t he
INSTITUTIONAL operationalization and Rate o f completion of
162 074 SUPPORT TO THE coordination o f t he budgeted activities i n t he
CONSTITUTIONAL services of the CCC
COUNCIL Constitutional Council
MINISTRY OF P UBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATIVE
HEAD 50- 15 0 93 000 15 0 93 0 00
REFORM
5 973118 5 973118
1 . P ercentage u se o f state h uman
resource m anagement
tools ( SIGIPES, job
IMPROVING T HE description, recruitment p lan,
Optimizing t he training p lan, organic t ext,
MANAGEMENT O F
163 040 management o f State organic f ramework, skills r eference
STATE H UMAN
human resources framework, mapping of
RESOURCES
workstations)
2.Percentage of S tate a gent
whose career is up to d ate
HOUSE OF T HE REPUBLIC
103
ffAIRS
I FIEE C
ME
ANDD T RUE
py


(ln t housands o f C FA f rancs)
No Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
CODE DRAGONELLE
3 8 9418 3 389418 3
MODERNIZA T ION OF Contribute t o i ncreasing Percentage o f public
164 041 PUBLIC S ERVICES the p erformance o f public s ervices w ith r eform t ools s ervices
and projects
-
GOVERNANCE A ND -. 5 2 25 699 5 2 25 6 99
INSTITUTIONAL Ensure proper Rate of c ompletion of
165 042 SUPPORT IN implementation of b udgeted activities i n
MINFOPRA MINFOPRA's p rograms MINFOPRA
HEAD 5 1 - ELECTIONS C AMEROON 12 953130 12 4 33 000
ORGANISATION 3 6 54 0 00 3 6 54 0 00
MANAGEMENT AND Strengthen the c redibility
SUPERVISION O F T HE o f t he poils a nd t he Contestation r ate o f t he
166 081 ELECTORAL AND consensus b etween the electoral proœss (pre a nd
REFERENDUM actors of t he e lectoral post e lectoral)(cid:127)
PROCESS I N process
CAMEROON
GOVERNANCE A ND Ensure o ptimal Rate of completion of 9 2 99 1 30 8 7 79000
167 183 INSTITUTIONAL i mplementation o f budgeted activities i n
SUPPORT TO E LECAM oprational programmes ELECAM
HEAD 52- CAMEROON HUMAN RIGHTS C OMMISSION 4 7 96 000 4 796 000
453100 453100
168 084 PROMOTION O F H UMAN S ri t g r h e t n s g c h u te lt n u r t e h e in h C um am an er oon Number o f requests
RIGHTS addressed to the C HRC
and r educe v iolations
460 0 00 460 0 00
Number o f allegations o f
human r ights v iolations s ent t o
169 085 wP H R U O M T A E N Cw R T I I G O H N T O S F w p C r o o m m b o a te t i a . m c p c u e n ss it p y to a n d r t t h h o e, s cC e H t R ha G t a w n e d re p. e ro ff p e . o c r t t i c v io e n ly o f m
reparation for v ictims
addressed (cleared or
closed)
357 9 00 357900
Eradicate the use o f t orture a nd
other c ruel i nhumane- N umber o f visits to places o f o r degrading
170 086 PREVENTION O F treatm'ent or deprivation o f liberty by t he punishment i n places of
TORTURE National Preventive
deprivation of l iberty i n Mechanism a gainst Torture
Cameroon
3525000 3 5 25000
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL
SUPPORT IN THE Ensure optimal Rate of i mplementation of
171 190 implementation of
HUMAN R IGHTS A D budgeted activities
! FREEDOMS S UB- programmes
SECTOR
HEAD 53- SENATE 16162 0 00 16 162 000
4200 0 00 4 2 00 0 00
CONTRIBUTION TO T HE
Overall v olume o f publie
CONSOLIDATION O F E nsure the b alanced
funding granted t o R egional
172 177 PARLIAMENTARY development of R egional
and Local A uthorities in r ural
CONTROL OF and L ocal A uthorities
areas
GOVERNMENT A CTION
11 962000 11962000
GOVERNANCE A ND
Ensure the optimal Rate of c ompletion of
INSTITUTIONAL
173 178 implementation o f bu. dgeted a ctivities in t he
SUPPORT T O T HE
SENATE P rogrammes SENATE
SENATE S ERVICES
NATIONAL C OMMISSION F OR T HE P ROMOTION O F
HEAD 5 4- 3 0 58 000 3 058 000
BILINGUAL-I SM A ND M ULTICULTURALISM
3058 0 00 3 0 58000
GOVERNANCE A ND
INSTITUTIONAL Ensure o ptimal Rate of completion of
174 181 SUPPORT TO T HE implementation of NCPBM budgeted activities a t t he .
NCPBM programmes NCPBM
.
RÉPUSl..10\Jÿ .-
lt A l
ÿes1tltNcÿ.,.Coÿ'"t1-1 c: t :JICft(cid:127)(cid:127)"' -(cid:127)ÿ ÿ.
4
· . ,RESIO!ÿÿÿERAl.
SEC
_ LEGISLATIVE A ND R EGULATORY
E SERVICE
...
ÿ ÿ-ii a.N'a sm A u C t T ô IV R E Y AFCFAEIRRS C TARIFO I 1E E CON ORME - ' -ÿ.-
J!.-.r111:n T RUE C Pÿ-


(ln thousands o f C FA francs)
Programme OBJECTIVE INDICATOR THAT PA
No
CODE DRAGONELLE
HEAD 5 5- PENSIONS 269 6 68 0 00 269 6 68 0 00
269 6 68 0 00 269 6 68 0 00
175 200 PENSIONS E re n t s ir u e r m e e p n a t y b m e e n n e t f i o ts f Payrnent rate
HEAD 5 6- EXTERNAL PUBLIC DEBT 825 0 00 0 00 825 0 00 0 00
825000 0 00 825000 000
SETTLEMENT O F
Honour t he State's
176 199 EXTERNAL P UBLIC Payrnent rate
commitments to d onors
DEBT
HEAD 5 7- DOMESTIC P UBLIC DEBT 947 3 00 0 00 947 3 00 0 00
I
SETTLEMENT OF THE Honour t he S tate's 947 3 00 0 00 9 47I 3 00000
177 203 DOMESTIC P UBLIC c ornmitments to r esidents Payrnent rate
HEAD 6 0- STATE SUBSIDIES AND C ONTRIBUTIONS 445 8 96 0 00 445 8 96 0 00
445896 0 00 445896 000
Contribute to t he p roper
178 202 C SU O B N S T I R D I I B E U S T A IO N N D S functioning o f p ublic b odies c E o x n p t e r c ib te u d ti o r a n t s e m of a d e
and i nstitutions
HEAD 6 5- COMMON E XPENDITURE 304 8 53 0 00 304 8 53 0 00
304853 0 00 304853000
179 201 COMMON OPERATING C overage of u nallocated Coverage r ate of u nallocated
EXPENSES State o perating e xpenses o perating e xpenses
HEAD 9 2- SHAREHOLDING 30 000 0 00 30 000 0 00
30 0 00 0 00 30 000 0 00
STATE SHAREHOLDING
180 198 IN S EMI-PUBLIC A ND Coverage o f State equity Coverage r ate of expected s hares
State shares
PRIVATE ENTERPRISES
www.prc.cm
HEAD 9 3- REHABILITATION/RESTRUCTURING 10 0 00 0 00 10 000 0 00
10 0 00 0 00 10000000
REHABILITATION A ND E nsure the r ehabilitation
181 196 RESTRUCTURING O F and r estructuring o f S tate- . r P e e s r t c ru e c n t t u a r g e e d o o f r c r o e m ha p b a i n li i t e a s te d
PUBLIC E NTERPRISES o wned companies
HEAD 9 4- INVESTMENT I NTERVENTIONS 104 6 24 0 85 104 6 24 0 85
Cover t he State's 104624085 104624085
INVESTMENT Cove rage r ate of u nauocated
182 195 unallocated o perating
INTERVENTIONS operating e xpenses
exoenses
HEAD 9 5- CARRIED F ORWARD 7 000 0 00 7 0 00 0 00
Continu,, e t he 7 0 00 0 00 7 0 00 0 00
MANAGEMENT OF implementation of projects
183 197 CARRY-OVER whose b udgetary Carry-over c overage r ate
APPROPRIATIONS execution is u nfinished in
2023
TOTAL 2 024 i 6 7 64 5 17 9 92 6 6 79 5 00 0 00
SECTION EIGHTY-lWO: T he expenditure a nd c harges of t he general b udget are broken down by head a nd b y nature o f
expenditure a s f ollows:
ln Million C FAF
BF BIP TOTAL
CHAPTER
2023 2024 2023 2024 2023 2024
01 P RESIDENCY OF T HE R EPUBLIC 41 8 63 46 3 33 8 500 9 000 5 0 3 63 5 5 333
02 ATTACHED SERVICES TO T HE 6168 6460 1 100 1 600 7 268 8 060
PRESIDENCY
03 N ATIONALASSEMBLY 18 4 82 18 4 82 11 1 40 11 140 2 9622 2 9622
04 P RIME M INISTER'S O FF ICE 13 7 60 15 2 00 6 000 7 200 1 9760 2 2 4 00
-------!'-~-------
PRESIDENCY D
PRESI 105
N. S ILENCE
SERVICE O RME


On Million C FAF)
BF BIP TOTAL
CHAPTER
2023 2024 2023 2024 2023 2024
05 ECONOMIC A ND SOCIAL C OUNCIL 1 3 91 1 3 91 500 560 1 8 91 1 9 51
06 MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS 34 950 37 375 3 7 00 4 2 00 38 650 41 5 75
07 MINISTRY O F TERRITORIAL 37 664 37 824 2 5 00 2 8 10 40 164 40 634
ADMINISTRATION
08 MINISTRY OF JUSTICE 61 592 63 188 5 0 50 6120 66 642 69 308
09 SUPREME C OURT 2 9 22 3227 2 2 00 2 2 00 5 1 22 5427
10 MINISTRY O F PUBLIC C ONTRACTS 12 866 13 773 970 1 0 00 13 836 14 7 73
11 STATE SUPREME A UDIT 4 1 51 4 4 27 1 7 00 1 7 00 5 8 51 6 1 27
12 G ENERAL DELEGATION O F N ATIONAL 95 838 97 116 7 9 00 8 0 00 103 738 105 116
I
SECURITY
13 M INISTRY O F DEFENCE 277 623 303 338 7 5 00 21 000 285 123 324 338
I
14 MINISTRY OF ARTS A ND CUL TURE 4 4 72 5 2 58 950 1 1 00 5 4 22 6 3 58
15 M INISTRY O F BASIC E DUCATION 241 632 264 253 19 572 25 390 261 2 04 289 643
16 MINISTRY O F SPORTS A ND PHYSICAL 22 505 22 989 1 3 00 1 8 10 23 805 24 799
EDUCATION
17 MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATION 4 3 30 5 2 41 550 600 4 8 80 5 8 41
18 MINISTRY OF HIGHER E DUCATION 65' 463 70 085 9 4 79 10 000 74 942 80 085
19 MINISTRYw O F SCIENTIFwIC R ESEARCHw A ND . 11 5 p 17 1 r 2 146 c 1 6 50 . c2 7 25 m13 167 14 8 71
INNOVATION
20 MINISTRY O F FINANCE 59 320 61 813 4 5 11 4 5 50 63 831 66 3 63
21 MINISTRY O F TRADE 7 1 52 7 9 72 1 0 30 1 0 30 8 1 82 9 0 02
'
22 MINISTRY O F ECONOMY, P LANNING A ND 26 234 30 825 36 410 38 180 62 644 69 0 05
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
23 M INISTRY O F TOURISM A ND L EI SURE 4 0 25 4 3 15 3 2 00 4 2 00 7 2 25 8 5 15
25 M INISTRY O F SECONDARY E DUCATION 468 599 524 877 9 2 99 14 365 477 898 539 242
26 MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS A ND CIVIC 18 241 19 156 7 9 30 . 7 9 30 2 6 171 2 7 086
EDUCATION
27 MINISTRY O F DECENTRAUZATION A ND 7 1 19 27 074 43 098 72 978 50 217 100 052
LOCAL D EVELOPMENT
28 MINISTRY O F ENVIRONMENT, 4 9 92 6 6 21 1 3 70 1 8 70 6 3 62 8 4 91
PROTECTION OF NATURE A ND
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
29 M INISTRY O F MINES, I NDUSTRY A ND 5 8 05 7 1 97 1 0 00 1 3 00 6 8 05 8497
TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT
30 M INISTRY O F AGRICULTURE A ND RURAL 66 757 61 732 49 146 51 369 115 903 113 101
DEVELOPMENT
31 MINISTRY OF LIVESTOCK, FISHERIES A ND 20 911 18 247 30 145 40 345 51 056 58 592
ANIMAL INDUSTRIES
32 MINISTRY O F WATER R ESOURCES AND 8 5 08 9 0 33 2 73 570 308 725 282 078 317 758
I
ENERGY
33 MINISTRY O F FORESTRY AND WILDLIFE 12 112 13 068 6 9 8 0 7180 19 092 20248
I
35 MINISTRY O F EMPLOYMENT A ND 20 339 22 646 5 2 49 5 7 75 25 588 28 4 21
I
VOCATIONAL TRAINING
II
__ _ _
P_R _e_s-,0-E N C ÿ E-'."ll\" R'!'EOP Iÿ .I B EL-I-Q- U -· · ··---E-...
PRESI
106
ICE
ME a nd


(ln Million C FAF)
BF BIP TOTAL
CHAPTER
2023 2024 2023 2024 2023 2024
'
36 M INIS- T RY O F P UBLIC WORKS (cid:127). 58 1 63 60 4 40 428 400 508 720 486 563 569 160
37 M INISTRY O F S TATE P ROPERTY, S URVEYS 17 7 53 19 5 06 700 780 18 4 53 20 2 86
AND LAND T ENURE
38 M INISTRY OF H OUSING AND URBAN 13 5 08 14 0 55 100 030 134 443 113 538 148 4 98
DEVELOPMENT
39 M INISTRY O F S MALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED. 7 2 58 8 428 2 6 50 3 322 9 9 08 11 7 50
ENTERPR. ISES.SOCIAL ECONOMY A ND
HANOI C RAFT
'
I
40 M INISTRY OF P UBLIC H EAL T H 184 719 196 011 44 0 00 59 2 70 228 719 255 281
-
41 M INISTRY OF L ABOUR A ND SOCIAL 6 4 25 6 6 89 600 600 7 0 25 7 2 89
SECURITY
42 M INISTRY O F S OCIAL A FFAIRS 9 6 05 10 9 04 8 6 60 9 7 10 18 2 65 20 6 14
I
43 M INISTRY O F W OMEN'S EMPOWERMENT 8 1 79 8 3 19 1 2 30 1 2 45 9 4 09 9 5 64
AND THE FAMIL Y
45 M INISTRY O F P OSTS A ND 5 492 6 266 8 5 20 8 8 20 14 0 12 15 0 86
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
46 M INISTRY O F T RANSPORT 6 0 36 9 8 30 82 2 20 87614 8 8 2 56 97 4 44
48 N ATIONAL COMMITEE FOR DISARMAMENT, 2467 2767 1 300 1 3 00 3 767 4 0 67
DEMOBILIZATION AND REINTEGRATION
49 C ONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL 3 4 44 3 444 500 500 3 9 44 3 9 44
50 M INISTRY O F P UBLIC SERVICE AND 9 4 11 11 7 73 4 3 00 3 3 20 13 7 11 15 0 93
ADMINISwTRATIVE REFwORM w.prc.cm
51 E LECTIONS CAMEROON 11 5 83 11 5 83 600 850 12 1 83 12 4 33
52 C AMEROON HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 2996 3 4 96 950 1 300 3 9 46 4 7 96
53 S ENATE 11 9 62 11 9 62 4 2 00 4 2 00 16 1 62 16 1 62
I
54 N ATIONAL COMMISSION O N T HE 2558 2558 500 500 3 0 58 3 0 58
PROMOTION O F B ILINGUALISMAND
MULTICULTURALISM
55 P ENSIONS 259 296 269 668 0 0 2 59 296 269 668
56 E XTERNAL PUBLIC DEBT 898 000 825 000 0 0 8 98 000 825 0 00
57 I NTERNAL PUBLIC D EBT 1 148 837 947 300 0 0 1 1 48 837 947 300
60 S TATE SUBSIDIES AND CONTRIBUTIONS 660 280 445 896 0 0 6 60 280 445 896
65 C OMMON EXPENDITURE 261 972 304 853 0 0 2 61 972 304 8 53
92 P ARTICIPATIONS 0 0 8 5 00 30 0 00 8 5 00 30 0 00
93 R EHABILITATION/RESTRUCTURING 0 0 5 0 00 10 0 00 5 0 00 10 0 00
94 I NTERVENTIONS IN I NVESTMENT 0 0 88 1 91 104 624 88 1 91 104 6 24
95 R EPORT 4 000 4 0 00 3 000 3 0 00 7 0 00 7 0 00
TOTAL 5 2 83 250 5 0 27 430 1359 250 1652 070 6 642 500 6 6 79 . 5 00
PRESIDENCE O F THE
PRESIOENC s SE
AND
fMCEOU R S
n, ... _,,,n ~ R.:utAe-EC u InICE
ME
107
PY


CHAPTERTWO
SPECIAL A PPROPRIATIONS A CCOUNTS
SECTION E IGHTY-THREE: T he a mounts o f c ommitment a uthorizations a nd p ayment a ppropriations for
the S pecial A ppropriation A ccounts o pened for p rogrammes are a s f ollows:
(Unit: thousands FCFAJ
PROGRAMMES PA CA
CODE PROGRAMME T ITLE 2024 2024
ELECTRICITY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT F UND 15 0 00 0 00 15 0 00 000
016 ENERGY SUPPL Y 1 607 9 16 1 607 9 16
137 ACCESS TO E NERGY 13 3 92 0 84 13 3 92 0 84
POSTAL S ECTOR DEVELOPMENT 900 000 900 000
NETWORK I NTENSIFICATION AND IMPROVEMENT O F N ATIONAL
129 900 0 00 900 0 00
POSTAL C OVERAGE
SPECIAL F UND FOR E LECTRONIC SECURITY 1500 000 1500 000
. www.prc.cm
132 SECURING T HE N ATIONAL D IGITAL ECOSYSTEM 1500 000 1500 000
CUL TIRAL POLICY SUPPORT 300 0 00 300 0 00
148 P RESERVATION O F C AMEROON A RT AND C ULTURE 40 0 00 40 000
DEVELOPMENT AND PROMOTION O F T HE PRODUCTION O F
149 260 0 00 260 0 00
CULTURAL GOODS AND S ERVICES
FINANCING OF S USTAINABLE D EVELOPMENT P ROJECTS I N T HE A REA OF
900 0 00 900 000
WATER AND SANITATION
138 A CCESS T O DRINKING WATER AND LIQUID WASTE T REATMENT 900 0 00 900 0 00
NATIONAL E NVIRONMENT A ND S USTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT F UND 1500 000 1500 000
002 CLIMATE CHANGE, D ESERTIFICATION AND D ROUGHT 631 0 00 631 0 00
091 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 869 0 00 869 0 00
FOREST D EVELOPMENT 3 000 0 00 3 000 0 00
054 MANAGEMENT A ND RENEWAL O F F OREST RESOURCES 2 300 0 00 2 300 0 00
DEVELOPMENT O F T IMBER AND NON-TIMBER F OREST
058 700 0 00 700 0 00
RESOURCES
SPECIAL W ILDLIFE P ROTECTION FUND 500 0 00 500 0 00
PRESSURE
108
PRE
LATIF
IRE
AND TUTORY
SERVICE
_.,,.: ::::I "I-I'm- you're AFFAIRS CA ! (cid:127)! _Ç _RME


(Unit: thousands o f FCFA)
PROGRAMMES PA ; CA
CODE PROGRAMME T ITLE 2024 2024
SECURING AND D EVELOPMENT O F W ILDLIFE R ESOURCES A ND
056 500 000 500 000
PROTECTED AREAS
PR.O DUCTION OF F ORGERY-PROOF T RANSPORT D OCUMENTS 6 0 00 000 6 0 00 0 00
.
DEVL E LOPMENT OF R OAD TRANSPORT, I NTERMODALITY A ND
153 2 942 400 2 942 400
ROAD SAFETY
DEVELOPMENT O F MARITIME R IVER A ND LAKE T RANSPORT A S
155 3 057 600 3 057 600
WELL AS P ORT ACTIVITIES
SUPPORT AND D EVELOPMENT O F TOURISM A ND LEISURE ACTIVITIES 1000 0 00 1000 000
014 PROMOTION O F T OURISM AND LEISURE 1000 000 1000 0 00
PECIAL FUND TO F INANCE RECONSTRUCTION O F THE ECONOMICALL Y
DISTRESSED AREAS OF T HE FAR-NORTH, NORTH-WEST A ND SOUTH-WEST 30 000 000 30 000 000
REGIONS
RECONSTRUCTION A ND D EVELOPMENT OF THE FAR NORTH,
80. 0 , I 30 000 000 30 000 000
NORTH-WEST AND S OUTH-WEST REGIONS
TOTAL E XPENDITURE O F 60 600 0 00 60 600 000
www.prc.cm
Ill- S PECIAL P ROVISIONS
CHAPTER ONE
THIRD-PARTY G UARANTEES, A GREEMENTS AND D EBTS
SECTION E IGHTY-FOUR:
1 ) T he Government s hall b e a uthorized t o grant State approval t o public e stablishments a nd
public and p rivate e nterprises for d omestic l oans d uring t he 2 024 financial year, for a total
amount n ot e xceeding 200 b illion CFA f rancs.
2) The c eiling for t he S tate approval g ranted by the q overnment to public e stablishments
and e nterprises f or e xternal loans s hall be fixed at 4 0 billion C FA f rancs f or the 2 024
financial year.
3) T he c onditions f or i mplementing t he p rovisions of p aragraphs 1 and 2 above s hall be
specified b y regulation.
SECTION E IGHTY-FIVE: Framework for t he t ransfer t o b anks of p ublic e ntities'
receivables from t he S tate.
1) T he ceiling o n public e ntities' receivables f rom t he S tate that the G overnment is
authorized t o transfer to c ommercial b anks s hall be fixed at 50 billion C FA f rancs
for the 2024 f inancial y ear.
PRESENCE FROM T HE PUBLIC
PRESENCE
RY GOOD AREA ..
IFIEE 109
DTR SERVICE RME py


CHAPTER T WO
OTHER S PECIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION E IGHTY-SIX: D uring t he 2 024 f inancial y ear and i n o rder to m eet the c ountry's
needs i n t erms e conomic, s ocial a nd c ultural d evelopment, t he P resident o f t he R epublic o f
Cameroon s hall b e a uthorized t o a mend by, m eans o f o rdinance, t he c eilings s et o ut i n
Sections s eventy-eigth, s eventy-nine, eighty-four and e ighty-five above.
SECTION E IGHTY-SEVEN:
1. T he President of the R epublic shall be allowed to amend t he finance, tax and
customs laws by ordinance.
2. T he Government s hall be authorized to use t he fresh resources ensuing from those
measures to m eet i ts commitments.
(cid:127)
SECTION E IGHTY-EIGHT: T he P resident of t he R epublic shall be a llowed t o t ake, b y
ordinance, a il m easures n ecessary for t he implementation o f t he s tructural reforms provided
for i n the a greements c oncluded with t he international f inancial c ommunity.
SECTION E IGHTY-NINE: The o rdinances r eferred t o i n S ections e ighty-six, eighty-seven and
eighty-eight a bove s hall be t abled b efore t he B ureaux o f t he N ational A ssembly and t he S enate
for r atification a t t he parliamentary s ession f ollowing t heir publication.
www.prc.cm
SECTION N INETY: T his law shall be r egistered, published a ccording t o t he p rocedure o f
urgency a nd i nserted in the O fficial G azette in E nglish a nd F rench.
NDE, 1 9 D EC 2023
PAYMENT
p OF-THE R EPUBLIC
110



=== FR_Const.ofCameroon2008.pdf ===


La C onstitution de
la R épublique de
La Constitution de la
Cameroun
Republique du
Cameroun
Révisé e t m is à j our. Avril 2 008
1
Révisé e t mis à j our en avril 2 008


pouvoirs p ublics. Elle e st c hargée :
­ d 'examiner l es r ecours e n m atière de contentieux é lectoral r égional
et municipal ;
­ d e statuer en d ernier ressort s ur les r ecours formés c ontre
les j ugements d éfinitifs r endus par les j uridictions inférieures e n
matière d e
acodnmteinnistiterautxif ; C ette b rochure a été i mprimée pour d istribution gratuite par
A­ e gxeanmdain Aefrr,i qt ouuet d a auntrse l dei f cféarderned d leu i l a in Jcooumrnbéaen t d e ex lp'Irnefsosrmémateionnt p e at rd lea loi.
l'Éducation d u
Cameroun ( CIED).
Article 4 1
Pour t ester v os c onnaissances s ur c ette constitution,
La C our d es c omptes sera compétente pour contrôler e t v euillez
consulter l es q uestions d'étude s uggérées qui s ont
statuer sur l es c omptes publics, a insi q ue s ur ceux d es a dministrations
publiques figurant dans l es s ections centrales d e ce l ivret.
et l es e ntreprises s emi­publiques.
Il doit :
Pour e n savoir plus sur Africa Agenda e t C IED, r endez­vous s ur
­ rendre des décisions d éfinitives s ur les jugements d éfinitifs rendus p ar l es
cours d es
comptes i nférieures ; Site W eb : www.AfricaAgenda.org o u
­ e xaminer toute a utre question qui l ui est expressément d évolue.
Courriel : o ffi ce@AfricaAgenda.org
sur elle par la loi.
4C2e t etet m v eisres io n de la constitution a é té r évisée, modifiée à l'article
à jour conformément à l a l oi camerounaise c i­dessous.
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t l es a ttributions
de la Cour s uprême et d es c hambres s ont régis p ar la loi n°
2co0m08p/r0e0n1d d l eus 1 c 4o a nvdriitli o 2n0s0 8d e m s oadisifiinaen tp eotu c ro c mopmléptlaéntet r. . c.ertaines
eduisxp a oisnitsioi q nus ed el a l a p r looci én d° u 9r6e/ 6 a p dpul ic 1a8ble devant eux j anvier 1 996 p our
mseordoinfite fri xl aé e Cso pnasrt il tau t liooin. d u 2 juin
(2) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t 1 972.
devoirs d es cours d 'appel e t d es juridictions judiciaires,
2


cChoanrgsétietu :t i ­o n d ’e dxea lma i Rnéepr u lebsli q reuceo duurs C eanm eroun : pouvoirs p ublics. E lle e st
matière de contentieux é lectoral régional et communal ; PRÉAMBULE
Français ­ statue en dernier r essort sur les recours
dféofrinmitéifss c reonndtrues l e psa rj u lgees mj uerindtisc t ions inférieures e n m atière
de c ontentieux
administratif ; Nous, peuple c amerounais, Fiers d e n otre
iddievnetristéit én al itniognuaisletiq, um ea eist ­c u elxtuarmeilnleo, nr sic ht oeusts a eu d tree n l iotitgree q ui l ui
edsétv eoxlup r peasrs é lam l oein. t P rofondément c onscients d e l'impérieuse
nécessité d e consolider d avantage n otre u nité, déclarons
solennellement que n ous Article 41 constituons u ne seule et
mfeêrmmee d N éatteiormn,i nl iaétsio pna àr l set am tuêemr es ud re lsetsin c, oe mt apftfeirsm p ounbsl i ncos tc reo m me
sPuar tc rieeu cxa dmeesr oe unntraeipsreis seusr p lau bb laiqsuee d se est i pdaéraaupxu dbeliq f uraetse.r n éidtéif,ie d re la
jsutsatticuee e etn d dee prnroiegrr è ress ;s Eorllte s :u ­ r les jugements
définitifs
rinednédpues np daarn leces c cohuèrrse m deesn t c aocmqputiesse ie ntf é rériseoulrueess ; à J a lalo p urxé sd eer vn eort r;e
cqounev laei n scaulust de l'Afrique r éside dans l e r enforcement des
tloieuntes da eu t prelu q su eens t pioluns q é utir ol uitis e esnt t erxep e rellesss é; m ­ ee nxat md éinvoonluse par
la(1 l )o L i.' oA rrgtiacnleis 4 a2ti o n, le f onctionnement, la composition e t les
attributions d e la C our s uprême e t de ses chambres c omprennent
lecos n ditions d e saisine de l'Organisation des N ations U nies ;
paainr sl ai q l ouie. l a p rocédure a pplicable d evant e lles s ont fixées
(2) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t les
3
attributions d es cours d 'appel et des juridictions j udiciaires,
3


peoxuavmoiinrse r p luebsl ir cesc.o E ulrles rd eolait t:if s ­ a ux c ontentieux é lectoraux
sréugr il oensa ruexc o eut rc so cmomnturen a leusx j ;u ­ g s etmateunetrs e dné dfineirtnifise rr e rensdsuosr tp ar l es
jiunrféidriicetuiorenss d ans l es a ffaires de contentieux ; ­ e xaminer , tout
alau l torei. contentieux lui incombant e xpressément par
ANroticulse, 4p 1e u ple camerounais,
eLta d C éhcalamrebrr eq ud ee sl a c p oemrspotensn ee sh tu c moaminpeé,t e snatnes p doiustri nc cotniotrnô ld eer
mraacîetr, isd ee i rnealilgiéionna,b d lee ds eesx ec o omu pd tee sc r pouybalniccse, ,a pinossis q èudee d lae ceux
edte s sa d crroéists e pt u dbelisc se n treprises p arapubliques.
Elle doit :
Acoffnirsmaecrr én eostr p ea a rt t laa c Dhéecmlaernatt ia ounx u lnibiveertrésse l floen ddeasm dernotitasl ed se l'homme,
lNaa Ctihoanrst eU d neiess e t l a Constitution ; ­ statuer en dernier r essort
dsuers l ceosm j upgteems ;e ­ n t esx daémfiinnietirf s to ruetned auust r pea rq ul eess jtuiornid i qcutiio l nusi e insfté rieures
eLxap C rehsasrétme ea nfrti cd aéivnoel ud ee s p a drr loai tl so i d.e l 'homme e t d es peuples et
toutes l es c onventions i nternationales d ûment ratifiées s'y
reanp ps oornt aa nrtt,ic le 42 , n otamment, aux principes suivants : ( 1)
L'organisation, l e fonctionnement, la composition e t l es
aletstr ip beurtsioonnsn dees o lan Ct l oeusr m s uêpmreêsm der o eitt s d e e ts oebsl i sgiaètgioenss ­ . toutes
nFéracneçsasiasi rL e'sÉ tà a t l e ausrs duérev eà l o topupse ms eesn t c, ita oinyesin q su l ees l a c op nrodcitéiodnusr e
aaspspulircea b lale p d roetveacntito enu dxe, s s om nitn foixriétéess ep ta p r rl éas l eori.v e­ l l 'Éesta dt r oits d es
pLo'oprgualantiiosantsio anu, tl oec fhotnocnteiosn (n2e) m ent, l a c omposition et l es
jautdtriicbiuatirioenss s d oenst cc oonufrosr md 'easp pà e l la e l to d i e.s j uridictions
4
4


pleosu r veocirosu p rsu b relilcast.if sE l aleu x d oé ilte :c ­ t ioe nxas mr éingeiorn ales e t municipales e t aux litiges
sinudpivéirdieuuerlss , d s eo ul 'És t raéts ;e ­ r vs eta dtuue rre e snp e dcetr n dieesr d r erossitos r dt ' sauurt rl ueis e rte d ceosu r isn t céorênttsre
lteosu tl eit ig peesrs ;o ­ n ne a le d roit de s'établir e n tout lieu et
dp'ayr c leirsc uj ulerird liicbtrieomnse inntf,é sroieuusr er és se enr v cea sd e dse j u litgigeemse p notsrt a rennt ds uusr d es
edti sà p loas titriaonnqsu a ildlitmé in; i­ s e trxaatimveinse r re t loautivt e asu tà re l 'o litridgree q p uuib lulici ,e às tl a sécurité
edxépvroelus s­ é lme ed notm icile est i nviolable. Aucune perquisition ne p eut y ê tre
edfefe pclteuiné e d r oit. s auf e n vertu de la
lnoei ;p ­ e l uet s ê etrcer e atd dmei s lae ,c soarruefs e pno n vdeartnuc dee e dsét ci nisviioonlasb é lem. aA nuacnutn d eu i n pgoéurveonicr e
jcuhdaicmiabirree ;d L eas c omptes est c ompétente
pour c ontrôler e t statuer sur les c omptes p ublics, a insi que sur c eux des
epnutbreliqpurieses se t s emi­publiques.
Enelle p :e ­ u tN ê utlr e poursuivi, arrêté o u détenu, sauf d ans l es cas et selon l es
pmaord l easlit éj usr i­ d is cttaiotunes d inéfféinriietiuvreems ed nets s c uor m leps tj eusg ;e ­ m Lean t los i dn éef inp ietiufst a revnodiru ds' e ffet
rEéxtraomaicnteif.r ­ t o ute autre
êqturees jtuiogné q eut i p l uuni ie , ss ta e uxf pe rne s vseérmtue dn'ut n deé v looil u per op maru l lgau loéie. ­ e N t p uul b nleié pee auvt a nt
lla'in cfroamctmioins s Aiortnic d lee 4 2 ; (1) L'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition
et l es a ttributions d e la Cour s uprême e t des c hambres qui la
cleosm c poonsdeintiot,n s
dsoen s ta f iisxiénees d p ea cr el all el o­ci.i , ­ aT inosuit e q up ee r lsao pnrnoec ée dsut rp er é aspupmlicéaeb ilnen d oecveanntet e j ullesqs,u 'à
ccoeu q rus 'e dl'luen seo a itu r deiceonncneu t ee n cuoeu p daabnlse l aeu s trict respect d es droits d e l a
dméoferanlsee e ;t ­ à T uonu ttrea piteemrseonntn h eu am darioni t e àn l tao u vitee,s à c i lr'icnoténgsrtaitén c pehsy. s (i2q)u e e t
dLe'osr g caonuirssa d tio'anp,p l ee l f eotn dcteiosn cnoeumrse d n'ta, p lap e clo smopnot sf iixtiéosn p e at r l e las la otit.ributions
5
5


pleosu r veociorsu prsu e bnlic ms.a Etilèlere d doeit : c o­ ne txeanmtieinuexr é lectoral r égional e t m unicipal ; ­
nrauils n oen dd oei ts ê otnr e o ri nigqinueié,t éd e e n se s o pinions ou convictions religieuses,
philosophiques o u politiques, s ous réserve d u respect de l'ordre
dpéucbilsicio ;n ­ s s dtaetsu e jurr eidnic dtieornnsie i nr f réersiesuorret ss ue rn l e ms a rteiècroeu r dse c coonntrteen l eties u x
la'Édtmati nà i s l'téragtaifr d; ­ d l e'É ttoaut t eesst l leasïc r .e Lliag i noenus ts raolnitté g e atr l a' n intideésp ;e ­ n edxaanmcein d eer,
tluoiu et sa tu etrxep lrietisgseé q muei n t d évolu p ar la l oi. ­ la l iberté de religion et
gdaer c aunlttiee e ; s Atr ticle 4 1 ­ l a l iberté d e communication, d 'expression, d e
dp'raessssoec, i daetio rné ue nt id oen , s yndicalisme, ainsi q ue l e d roit d e grève sont
gcaornadnittiiosn dsa fnixsé leess p ar la l oi ; E lle doit : ­ la N ation protège e t
promeut la
ffaomndilelem, ent naturel d e la s ociété h umaine. E lle statue en dernier ressort
csoumr l petse jsu g; ep mroetèngtse d l eésfi nf eitmifsm reesn,d l uess p jeaurn l eess , j u lersid picetirosnosn n inefsé r âieguéreess ed te l se s
peexprsroenssnéems e hnatn d déicvaopluéee s p ;a e r xl aa ml oiin. e L 'É totuatte g a auratrnet it q luee dsrtiooint d qeu i l 'el uni f easntt à
el'ésdt uo cbalitgioanto. iL re'e.nseignement p rimaire
ALr'otircglea n4 i2sa tion e t l e c ontrôle d e l'enseignement à tous les niveaux
cfoonncsttiiotunennetm u enn dt,e l vao c iro i mmppoésriiteiounx e dte l el 'És t mati.s ( s1io) n Ls'o d rgea lnai s Caotiuorn s , ul ep r ême et
dlees s m eos d cahlaitémsb d rees s c aoisminper,e l nense c not nl edsit i coonnsd diteio snasi s dien e s a eits l iense , m a oindsai liq téuse d e
seat i msionyee. nN nual nn te l e p ev eurt se enm êetrnet d p 'ruivnée, i snaduefm àn diteés d f ainnss p leusb l ciqounedsit i ons
fleixsé em si sp saior n las l doei s. ( c2o)u L r'so rd g'aapnpiseal te iotn d , e les f j uornidcticiotinonnesm juednitc,i al air ec os m copmospitrieonnn e etn t
les conditions de saisine, ...
6


aauttteoinritteé sà p l au b sléiqcuuersit.é E, àlle l a d loibite :r tp éo, rà te l r'e xistence o u aux biens d'autrui ; ­
ecxoanmteinnteier ul exs é rleecctoourrasu rxe r laétgifiso n aauuxx et m unicipaux ; ­ toute personne a droit
àe nu vnir o nnement s ain ; ­ s tatuer e n d ernier r essort s ur les r ecours
ccoans t dree l l eitsig j eusg e; m­ t eonuttse rp eenrdsuosn np ea ra l e les d jurroidit ic etti ol en sd e invfoéirri ed uer e trsa v eani l ler ; ­ examiner,
tpoeurts aountnree l pitaigretic q ipuei la uui ex s cth eaxrpgreess sp éumbleiqnute d sé evno lu fo pnactri o lan l doei. ­ s e tosu rtees sources ;
cAirtoticyleen 4 s1 c o­ nt otruibsu l eesn t à l a défense de la Patrie : La chambre des comptes
ecostm pétente p our c ontrôler e t s tatuer s ur l es c omptes publics, ainsi q ue sur
ceenutrxe p dreisse s publiques et p arapubliques. ­ l'État g arantit à tous l es
cfeitmoymeenss ,, h leosm dmroeists e e t t l ibertés énoncés a u préambule de la Constitution.
Elle d oit : ­ s tatuer e n d ernier ressort s ur l es j ugements définitifs
rjeunridduicsti o pnasr l iensfé rieures en c as de l itiges ; L 'État et l a Souveraineté ­
etoxuatmesin aeunttr e s q uestions qui l eur s ont e xpressément d évolues par la loi.
Article premier
ALrat ic Rleé p4 u2b ( li1q)u e Unie du C ameroun est, avec e ffet à compter de l a date
dC'aemnteréroeu enn ( v loigi u ne° u 8r4 d ­1e d l au p4 r éf ésvernieter 1 l o9i,8 d4é).n ( o1m) Lm'oéreg a Rnéispautbiolinq u, el e d u
sfounpcrtêiomnen e emt d eenst, c lah a cmombrpeoss q ituioi n la e ct ol emsp a otstreibnut t,i ol enss c d oen ldai t Cioonusr d e s aisine de
cperollceésd­cui r aei n aspip qliucea bl ale d evant e lles s ont f ixées p ar la loi. (2) La
République du C ameroun e st un E tat unitaire d écentralisé.
Efolnlec te iosnt n uenme ee nt ti n, d laiv cisoimblpeo, sl aitïiqoune e , td l éems oa cttrraibtiuqtuioen es t d ( e2s) L c'oourgrsa n di'saaptpioenl ,e l te d es
juridictions judiciaires,
7
7


pdoouitv r oeicrso np nuabîltirces .e E t lp lero d téogite :r E lellse v aleurs traditionnelles q ui sont
ceot nà f ol ar ml oei.s E a lluex d p oriitn :c ­ ip e exsa dméimneorc lreast iqr euceosu, r asu exn d mroaittsiè d ree d l'h'éolemcmtioen s
erét g ionales
mcounntricei pl easle d sé ;c ­ i ss iotantsu ef irn eanle d s eE rnlleie d r o reits assosrtu s reurr ll 'eésg ar elitcéo u dres t ous les
(c3i)t oL yeesn lasn dgeuveas no tf fl iac ie lollie.s d e la République du C ameroun s ont
lf'raanngçlaaiiss, e cte l se d eux langues a yant l e même statut. L 'État g arantit
ldau p b roilimngoutiiosnm e sur l 'ensemble du territoire .
Asr'etifcfoler c4 e1 d Eel le p r otéger e t d e promouvoir les langues nationales.
La C our d es comptes est c ompétente p our contrôler et s tatuer sur les
pcaormapputebsli q puuebsli.c s( 4, )a S inas id qeuveis s eu er sc te « u xP a diexs­T ernatvraeipl­rPisaetrsi e p u»b.liques et
(5) Son d rapeau e st c omposé de t rois b andes verticales égales :
vroeurtgee, et j aune, surmontées d 'une é toile d'or a u centre de la bande rouge.
j­u s gteamtueen e tsn d déefrinniietifrs r e resnsdourts s puar rl e less juridictions i nférieures des c omptes ;
(n6a)t i Soonna lh e ysmt n« e Ô C ameroun, b erceau de nos ancêtres ». ­ e xamine toutes
saountrte e sx qpureessstiéomnse nq tu d i léuvi o lues p ar l a l oi.
(7) Le sceau de l a République d u C ameroun e st un m édaillon circulaire en b as­
relief de 46 millimètres d e d iamètre, portant à l 'avers e t au c entre u ne t ête d e
jperuonfeil t f oilluer nd éee à d extre vers (1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t
cleasf é aiettrr ibà u dtieounxs f deeu i llale s C o eut rf l a snuqpurêéme e à e l at ds eesn e ssiètrgee d s ec oc minqp o crateb o usnsee b s rd aen cc haec a doe, avec
llaa m traennctihoen s f ruapnéçraieisuere « e Rt él ap u dbelviqisuee n dauti oC naamlee «ro Puna ix»­ Ti nrsacvraitiel­ a (2u)­ d Le'osrsgoaunsis d aeti o n, l e
fsoièngcteiosn a ninesmi eq nute, l l aa c poromcpéodsuitrieo na pe pt ll iecsa ba ltetr d ibeuvtaionnts e duex ls ao Cnto fuixré s eusp p rêamr lea e lot i d. e( 3s)
CL'oourgr as nuipsraêtmione, e l et d f oensc stiioèngnees m soenntt , i nl as c croitmesp oa sui­tdioens se ot u less d a et tl raib turationnchs ed e in fl aé r ieure ; au
freeuviellress u e nte f lab nraqnucéhee à d l ea ct raafénicehre à s d uepuéxr ie ure d e c inq cabosses d e c acao, avec
ltara mncehneti o snu pf réarnieçuaries ee t « l aR é dpeuvibsleiq n uaet i doun aC lea m « eProauixn­T »r ai nvsacilr­i t (e4 )a Lu'­odregsasnoisuast id oen ,l al e
fsounpcrtêiomnen e emt deenst, sl aiè cgoems pd oessi t Cioonu e rst l d e'sa pa ptterilb e utt id oenss j dueri dl aic t Cioonusr j udiciaires, et a u c entre les armoiries de l a République du
8
8


aatutrtiobruittéiosn psu :b ­ l iq du'eexsa.m Eilnlee r a l e pso u rer c ours en matière d 'élections
sréugpiéornieauler s e t e ­ t m deu n sticaitpuaelre e s nd u d e Crnaimere rreosusno »rt i snusrc r leitse sr e scoouusr sl e f ob romrdé s c ontre les
djuégfienmitiefsn rtse n dus par les juridictions inférieures e n matière d e litiges
atodumt ia nuisttrrea t liitfisg e; ­q du'ie lxuai me sint e erx pressément d évolu p ar l a loi .
Lsuersm aormntoéi r eiens c d hee f l ad eR léap l uébgleiqnudee d «u R C éapmubelrioquune s doun Ct uanm éecrouusns o»n e t soutenu
cpraoris d éesu p xo f rataisncte l aau d xe vise « Paix­Travail ­ Patrie » i nscrite a u­dessus d u
bord i nférieur.
Patrie « base ».
L'écusson e st composé d'une é toile sur champ d ' é vent et d'un triangle de
cghuaerugleéss, d e l a silhouette g éographique d u Cameroun
ds'aabzluer., Le at s c uhracmhabrrgeé d se dse c lo'émppétee se t e dset c lao m bapléatnecnete d peo juurs t cicoen t drôel e r e t
pstuabtuliqeur es su re lte sse cmoim­pputbelsiq p uuebsl.ics, ainsi que s ur c eux d es entreprises
(8) La c apitale de la R épublique d u Cameroun est : Y aoundé.
­ s tatue e n dernier r essort sur les j ugements d éfinitifs rendus par l es
juinrfiédricietiuorness d es
cCoammpeterosu ;n A q rtuici l le' e 2 x e (1rc) e L as o siot u pvaer r la'ininteertém n éadtiaioirnea l deu a Pprpéasritdieenntt a due p lae u ple d u
mRéepmubbrleiqsu Aer e tict ld ee 4s2 du Parlement, soit p ar v oie de référendum.
(1) L'organisation, l e f onctionnement, l a composition e t les a ttributions de
lsau C proêumr e e t d es c hambres q ui la c omposent, l es c onditions de saisine
ldae l o cie. l( l2e)­ cL i ea sin asui t qourieté l sa cp hroacrgéédeusre d aep l pal i gceasbtlieo nd e dvea ln'Ét te altl e tise n sonnetn fti xl eéuerss p ar
puonuivveorisrse ld dui r peecut po lue i entd s iroenctt ,é sluaeusf d a iusp sousfiftriaogne c ontraire de la présente
lCeso n astttritiubtuiotino.n ( s2 d) e Ls'o c rgoaunrsis da'taiopnp,e l le e fto dnecsti o junrnideimcteionnts, l jau d ciocmiapiroessi,tion e t
9
9


(c3it)o L yee nv o âtgeé e d set é vginagl t e a t n sse c erte pt,l ue st a to luet d roit d e voter . ­ examine l es
preacrotisu r est r gerloautifpse amuexn étsle p cotiloitniqsu r eésg ia oindaelnets l ee st m éleucntieciuprasl eà s p .r e Anrtdicrele le3 s L es
ddeé c viositoen .s
Ils s ont t enus d e respecter les p rincipes de la d émocratie,
t­o e uxt aa mutinree l itige q ui leur e st e xpressément dévolu par l a l oi. l a
ls'uonuivtée r naaintieotnéa e let s . I ls sont c onstitués e t e xercent l eurs a ctivités
àco lan fl oorim. ément
Article 41 L a
chambre des comptes e st compétente p our c ontrôler e t s tatuer s ur
les c omptes publics, a insi que sur ceux des e ntreprises publiques et
pLaer a ppouubvloiqiru d ees .l 'A Erttaict l ees 4 t exercé p ar : I l : ­ Le
dPeré l sai d Reénpt u blique ; ­ statue en dernier ressort
Psuarr l leems ej ungt.e d meesn ts définitifs r endus par l es juridictions i nférieures ; ­ L e
comptes ; ­
etoxuatmesin a eu tres matières q ui lui sont e xpressément dévolues p ar la l oi.
Pouvoir exécutif
CHAPITRE I
APrrtéicslied e 4n2t L dee l a République (1)
L'organisation, le fonctionnement, la c omposition et l es attributions de
lsau Cproêumr e et d es chambres q u'elle c omprend, l es conditions de
msaêisminee q ( u1e) L lae p Prorécséidduernet d aep p lalic Raébpleu d beliqvuaen t e e sltle les s c ohnetf f dixeé l s'E ptaatr. l d ae l o i.
(2) Elu par l'ensemble d e la Nation, i l est (2) L 'organisation, l e
fonctionnement, l a composition et l e s ymbole d e l 'unité n ationale.
Idl e dsé f Cinoitu l ras p do'aliptipqeule e dt e d e las n juartiidoinc.t io Il n esx e jurdciec il aeisre ast.t rI ilb vuetiiollen sa u
respect d e la Constitution.
10
10


aprobuitvroaigrse , p auub l bicosn. I flo vnecitliloen, np eamr s eonnt d es p ouvoirs publics. ­ statue en
dceornnteienrt ir eeusxs oé rlte scutor r laels r ér egcioonuarsl e etn m m uantiicèiprea l d ;e ­ statue en dernier ressort
rseucro l uerss c ontre l es d écisions d éfinitives de la N ation et d e son i ntégrité
itnefrérritioeruiareles, e d ne s m jautgièerme ed net s p er ermndaunse pnacer le ets d juer i cdoicnttiionnusit é d e
la'Édtmati ne ist t draut ir fess ;p Aerctti cd lee s6 t­ r as ittaétsu e et s a ucrc t oorudts a i unttreer n liatitgioen qauuix l .u i est
deéxvporelus sp éamr lean l to i.
(1) Le Président d e la R épublique e st élu à la majorité d es s uffrages
exprimés au suffrage universel direct, é gal e t s ecret. Article 4 1
cLoam Cpoteusr d peusb l cicosm, pa tinessi e q sute c os umrp céetuexn t dee pso e unr tc reopnrtirsôelesr pe ut bs ltiqautueesr e stu s r el emsi ­
psuebplti q( 7u)e as.n (s2. ) I l L ees Pt rrééésliidgeibnlte d .e la R épublique e st é lu pour u n mandat d e
L(3'é) le ction a lieu au moins vingt (20) j ours e t a u plus cinquante
(p5a0r) l ej osu c rso u; r­ s s d taetsu e c od méfpinteitsiv ienmféerinetu sruers l ;e a s v juagnet ml 'eexnptisra d tiéofnin dituif s m r aennddauts d u
RPérépsuibdleiqnut ed ee n la e xercice ; ­ e xamine t outes autres q uestions qui l ui sont
epxapr rl eas l soéi.ment d évolues
(4) En c as de v acance d e la f onction d e Président d e la R épublique
par s uite d e d écès, d e démission ou d' empêchement définitif dûment
lceo C nsotnastée ip l a cor n stitutionnel, l es é lections du nouveau P résident
djoeu lras R e té dpeu bc leiqnut e v i dnogitv (e1n2t 0s )e j ot eunrsir a d ua n pslu usn a dpérèlasi ld ae v macoainnsc ed e d e v i lnag fto ( n 2ct0io) n
saoinnst if iq xuéee sl a p p arro l caé l doui.r ( e1 a) pL p'olircgaabnleis a atvioann,t l q eu f 'oenllectsio nnen e somieenntt , v l aac caonmtepso sition
seat i lseise a n tetr ic boumtiopnosrt ed net lp aa C so, u lers s c uopnrêdmitioen est d d ee s s ac ihsainmeb d rees c d eollenst ­e clil e a i enssti
que la p rocédure applicable avant q u'elles n e soient vacantes .
c(2o)u L rs'o d rg'aapnpiseal te iot nd ,e lse tf roibnucntiaounxn e smonetn dt,e l a p lc eoinm dproositi t eioxne re cté l se s p a forn l ect iP ornéss i ddeesn t
Pderé l sai dR eénpt u dbel i lqau R e ép paur b inliqtéureim. j usqu'à l 'élection du nouveau
11
11


­p o du'evxoaimrsi np eurb lleicss .r eI lc eosutr c sh eanr gm éa :t i ère de c ontentieux d es
édleercntiieorn sr e rsésgoiortn sauler sl e e st r mecuonuicrsip faolerms é; s ­ d c oen s ttraet ul eesr j e ung e ments
rdeénfidnuitsif s p a r les j uridictions inférieures en
cas de ( b) L e Président de la République p ar
ipnetéurti mn i ­ c ol en Ptersétseird ;e m nto dduif i Seér nl aa t C o oun ss toitnu t vioicne n ­pi r léas ident ne
gcooumvpeornsietimone nd tu . Il ne peut o rganiser de r éférendum ni se
àp rl éas pernétseird ence d e la République. ( c) Toutefois, lorsque
dl'oer g laa R niéspautiobnliq d uee lp ' éalre icnttiéornim p rp éesuidt,e a nptierèllse cl 'oenxisguelt,a l etio Pnr é dsui d ent
cCoonnssteituil t ionnel, m odifier l a composition du g ouvernement.
Article 4 1 L a c hambre des comptes e st c ompétente
pcoonutrr ô ler e t statuer sur l es c omptes p ublics, ainsi q ue s ur c eux
dcehsa re gnét r:e (p5r)i s Leess p cuabnldiqiduaetss e àt l da' é pcroénsoidmeniec e m d ixute g . o Ilu e vsetr n ement
r­e d ned us tsa ptuaerr l e esn j duerirdnicietiro rness s inofrét r sieuur rl eess ;j uA gretimclee n4 t2s P déofuinr iê tiftsre
.
êctarned idat à l a République, i l f aut
ceat mp oelritoiquuneasis e d t e a v noaiirs a sattnecinet, l' j o âugire d dee s t eresn d tero­citisn q c i( v3iq5u) e asn s révolus
là'é llae c dtaiotne. d( e6 ) Les conditions d 'élection du P résident de l a
République s ont f ixées p ar la loi.
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t l es
adtetr il bau Ctioonusr s uprême et des chambres q u'elle c omprend,
alepsp cliocanbdlietio d nesv daen t s e alilseisn e s o dnet cf iexélless p ­cair a lain lsoii .q ( u1e) lL ae p prorécséidduernet
éalpur èe sn t arev oe irn p f orêntcét is oenr m ent.
( 2 ) I l p rête serment d evant le peuple
Ccaomuresr o du'anpapise,l e ent d p erés s juernidceic t dioenss m juedmicbiareirse sd ,e dsu
dPea rl lae mC oeunrt, s d uup rC êomnes er éil u cnoinss e tintu stiéoannnceel e sto lennelle.
12
12


(p3r)o cL éad f uorrem du'laep dpuli c saetriomne dnet se td lias p ositions d es alinéas (1) e t ( 2)
csio­dnet sf isxuése s par la loi. ­ s tatue définitivement s ur l es r ecours
cdoénctisreio l ness d éfinitives rendues p ar les j uridictions i nférieures
feonn c mtiaotniè dree d Per é csoidnetennt t dieeu x la a Rdémpiunbisltiqrauteif e; s( 4t )i nL cao m patible a vec
atocutitveit é a u ptrroef ef osnsciotinonne pllueb. l ­i q sutaet u éele d cétivfien it oivue ment sur tout
aquuti rl eu i c eosntt e enxtpiereusxs ément d évolu par la loi.
Article 8
A(1rt)i cL lee P 41ré sident d e la République représente l'Etat d ans tous
Lleas ca hcatemsb dree d l ae s v ie co p mupbtlieqsu ee .st c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t
dsteast ue enrt r seuprr l ieses sc op mubplitqeuse p su e btl ic psa,r a apinusbi lq iquuee s s.u ( r2 c)e I ul xe s t C hef d es
A(3r)m I lé aesss.ure la sécurité i ntérieure et extérieure d e la République.
Il assure :
e(4x)t rI al o arcdcirnéadiritees lea su pa rmèsb a dsessa p dueiusrssa ne ct e less é etrnavnogyèérse s. Les a mbassadeurs
eetx t leraso erdnivnoayiréess des p uissances étrangères s ont accrédités auprès
dreen lduui.s I l psa srt a letus ec notu ersn d deesrn c ieorm rpetsesso r int fs éurrie luerse jsu g. eI lms e exnatsm dinéefinntit i fs
tqouuit el e ua ru te rset qe uxepsretiossné ment dévolue p ar l a loi.
(5) L e P résident d e la République édicte l es l ois d ans les
cporénvduiteiosn à s l 'article 4 2 ci­dessous.
(a1tt)r iL b'uotrigoannsi s daet i loan C, l oeu fro s nucptiroênmneem eet n dte, sl a c h coammpboressit ic oonm e pt rl eens n ent ,
lleess c coonnddiittiioonnss fd ixeé seasi s pinaer l dau C Coonnstsiteuilt i coonn. s( 7ti)tu I tl ioe nxenrecl ed a len ds r oit
dCeo ng srâecile s u appérèrise uc or nd seu llata mtioang id sutr a ture. ( 8) I l e xerce le d roit
mdea gg irsâtcraet ua rper.ès c onsultation d u C onseil supérieur de la
((28)) L I l 'o erxgearcneis a l’atiuotno,r l ieté f os tnacttuiotaninree.ment, l a composition e t l es
ajutdtriicbiuatiiroenss, ( d9e) s I l C coréuers e d t ' oarpgpaenli se et dl eess s juerrivdiiccetiso n asd m inistratifs
de l'Etat.
13
13


(m 1il0it)a Iirl en so m dem l 'e É a tuaxt. e ­ me xpalomisin c eiv lielss e ret c ours r elatifs a ux é lections régionales et
municipales .
c( o1n1f)è I rle l es d écorations e t distinctions honorifiques de la R épublique. ­
rsetantduues e pna dr el ersn ij eurr i rdeiscstioornts s iunrf él erise ur erecos ue rns contre l es jugements
cpaesu d t,e s il it nigéecse s asdamirein i,s d triasstiofsu ;d (r1e2 l ')A L ses eP mrébsléidee n nat t dioen l aal eR é appurèbsli qc uoen s ultation du
bGuoruevaeurxn ed me e l'Ants s, ed mesb l ée n ationale e t d u S énat. L 'élection d ' une
Anosusevemllbel é e a lieu c onformément a ux dispositions d e l'article 15 ( 4).
Article 4 1
Achrtaicmleb 9re L dae s c omptes est c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t s tatuer sur les
pcoamrapptuebsl i pquubelsic. s( 1 a )i nL sei P qurées s iduern c te duex l dae R sé e pnutbrelipqruisee p se puut,b lloiqrusqeus ee tl e s
ucirrgceonncseta pnacre d s él 'cerxeigt eq nuti ,l u dié ccolanrfeèrr e l' él etast p do' u voirs spéciaux p révus par l a l oi. E lle
sdteartnuiee r e rne s sort sur l es j ugements définitifs rendus p ar l es juridictions
icnofénrtireeu l r'iensté d geristé c ot emrrpittoersia ;l e( 2 d )e E l na c naasti o dne, ms oenn ae cxeis t gernacvee, s on i ndépendance
loeu P sreéss i idnesntitt u dteio nl as , R épublique peut d éclarer l' état de s iège p ar d écret
eIlt in Afrotircmlee 4 la2 N praetniodnr ed e to suate dsé m ciessiounre p sa qr um 'iel j susgaeg en .écessaires.
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, la c omposition e t l es attributions de
la C our suprême et des c hambres q u'elle comprend, les conditions
sdoen st af iixséinse p daer celles­ci ainsi q ue l a procédure a pplicable d evant elles
la loi. A rticle 10 ( 1) Le P résident d e la R épublique l es nomme .
Le P remier M inistre et, sur proposition d e c e dernier, l e (2)
mL'oermgabnreissa dtiuo n G, ol eu vf oenrncetiomnennetm. ent, l a c omposition e t les a utres
Ilel d uér f minaitn l deautr s. attributions. Il met f in à
14
14


p(2e)u Lt ed é Plérégsuideer n cte d rtea i lnas R déep suebsli qp uoeu v oirs a u Premier ministre, ­
Gstoautuvee re nne m deernnti e ert r teosust o arut t sreu rh laeus tr f eocnocutirosn cnoanirtere d lee s l' am demminbirsetrsa dtioun d e l 'État,
cdaadnrse le d e s jugements rendus par les j uridictions i nférieures
teenm c paosr ad iree l id tiug e Psr éa sdimdeinnits d trea t liafs R ; é (3p)u bE lniq c uaes , di l' e ­ m expaêmchineem ,e tnotu t
laeu Ptrree m litiigeer m luiin disétlréeg euta, n etn e cxapsre d s'seémmpeêncth c eemrteanint s d e d ec es ed se r pnoieurv o, it rosu ,t
Gauoturev e mrneemmberen td à u l' exercice d e ses fonctions d ans l e
dcéaldérgea d ti'ounn e e x presse de certains de ses pouvoirs. Article 41
La chambre des c omptes est c ompétente pour contrôler e t statuer sur
les c omptes p ublics, a insi que sur ceux des e ntreprises publiques et semi­
publiques.
Lstea tG uoeu evne r nement I l
dernier r essort s ur les j ugements définitifs r endus en p remière i nstance.
ACrotiucrles 1 d1es
cqoume pd téefsin ;i eL e p a Gr ol eu vP errénseidmeennt td m e e lat e Rné œpuubvlirqeu l ea. p­ oe lxitaiqmuein e d e to l au t nea atiuotnre t e lle
eqxupersetsiosné mq uein l ut id e ésvto lue p ar l a l oi.
Il est responsable devant l 'Assemblée n ationale dans l es conditions
meto sdealolitné s le p s r évues à l'article 34 ci­dessous .
(1) L'organisation, l e f onctionnement, la composition e t les a ttributions
de la Cour s uprême et des c hambres q u'elle comprend, l es
csoanisdiintieo nd su d Geo uvernement a insi que la procédure applicable devant
eelnle e ss ,t s leo nc th f eixf,é a si n psair ql au el o lia. A prrtoiccléed 1 u2re ( 1 a)p L pelic Parbelem dieerv manint is etlrlees .
d(2e) l L'a'oprpgliacnaitsioanti od ne,s l e lo f iosn.ctionnement, la composition e t (2) I l est c hargé
devoirs des cours d 'appel et des j uridictions judiciaires,
15
15


ppoouuvvooiirrss p s tuabtulictasi.r e Ils e e xte n rcoem lemse a ux e mplois c ivils, sous r éserve
dceess d p orémroaginaetisv.e ­s e dxua m Prinéesi dl eesn rt e dceo u lar sR r éeplautbiflsiq a uuex d éalnesc t ions
rréegssioonrat l es et m unicipales ; ­ s tatue en dernier
spuarr l leess r juercioduicrtsio cnosn itnrefé lreiesu jruegse emne cnatss dd éef i lnitiitgifess r e; n ­ d us
leoxi al umi i dnéel,è egnu e d e erxnpireers r seésmsoernt t,. tA orutsic l aeu 1 tr3es l itiges q ue la
Article 41 L a f onction de membre du Gouvernement et t oute
dfoen p crtiéosnid aesnsti m ilée s ont incompatibles avec c elle de d éputé,
dteur rp itoourivaoleir, e d xeé p cruétsifi do eun dt e d ' l ' u A nses a esmsbolcéiea td io'unn p er o cfoellsesciotivnintée l le
npautbioliqnuaele. oL ua dc hea tmoubtree a duetrse c e onmtrpetpersis ees p t uc obmliqpuéet eo nut e s ep moui­r
cdoenst r eônletrre e ptr i ssteast up eurb s liuqru l eess e cto s mepmtei­s publics, ainsi que sur ceux
Epulleb l iques.
statue e n d ernier ressort sur les j ugements définitifs r endus par les
jiunrféidriicetuiorenss ;
PPAoRuvToIEir l I éIIg C isolamtipf t­ e esx amine t outes autres questions q ui lui s ont
expressément d évolues par la loi.
Article 1 4
A(1rt)i cL lee p 4 o2u voir l égislatif e st exercé par l e P arlement qui
cfoonmcptiorennnde md eeunxt, ( l2a) c Cohmapmobsriteiosn : e ( t1 l)e Ls' oa rtgtraibnuistiaotniosn d , el e l a C our
csoumprpêrmened e ,t l deess c c ohnadmitiborness dq eu ' seallies i ne du G ouvernement,
parinoscié q duuere l a a pplicable devant elles , s ont fixés p ar l a loi.
((32)) L L e'osr g daenuisxa c thioanm, l ber ef osn dcuti oP nanrelemmeennt,t ls ae c r oémunpiosssietinotn l ee t m l eêsm e jour
dates :
attributions d es cours d'appel et des tribunaux judiciaires,
16
16


pseosusviooinrs o p rduibnlaicisre. E p lelen d: aa n) t e l ne s m ois de mars, ­ examine les
jrueicno eutr sd e re n laotvifesm a burxe é dleec ctihoanqsu reé g ainonnéaele, s s ue rt c m ounnvioccipaatiloens d d ee s
dbeu r le'Aasusxe mblée n ationale et du Sénat, ­ statue définitivement
jsuurrid liecsti o rencso i unrfés r cieounrteres l eens c juagse d mee lnititgse rse n; db u) se n p a sre l sessi o n
eRxétrpauobrldiqinuaei r oeu, à d ' luan d teiemrsa nd dees d mue pmrbérseidse dnet s d e d e lau x c hambres .
Tcoonuvteofqouisé, e less s d imeuulxta Cnhéammebnrte qsu nee s p i l e'aufvfaeinret ê dture j o ur les
cdoenucxe.rne toutes
A(4r)ti cL lees 4 d1e ux c hambres d u Parlement s e réunissent e n
cLoan cghraèms à b r lea d d eesm c aonmdep t deus e psrét s ciodmenpté dteen ltae R péopuur bc loiqnutreô l;e r e t
estnattrueeprr i ssuers l p eus b cloiqmuepste e st p ublics, ainsi q ue sur c eux d es
apfainra dpeu b: l ­iq r ueecse.v d oeir l uan R méepsusbaligqeu e d u président de l a
République ; ­ r ecevoir le
seenr m deernnti e dre rse s mseomrt bs ruers l ed su a Crroêntss ed ilé c fionnitsiftsit u retinodnunse l; ; ­ statuer
les c ours d es
ecoxpmrpetsessé m; ­e e nxt ad mévinoelur e to ;u ­ t ep r aeuntdrere q uuneest id oénc qisuioi nl e suur re usnt projet o u une
dp'raompoesnidtioenm ent c onstitutionnel.
Lorsque l e P arlement se r éunit en c ongrès, l e B ureau d e l '
Anastsioenmablelé per éside l es t ravaux.
(1) L 'organisation, l e f onctionnement, la c omposition et l es
caottmribpuotsioen, s le d se c loan C diotiuorn ssu d perê smaies ie nte d dees lc 'Ahsasmebmrbelsé eq un 'ealtlieo n ale
et d u S énat.
l(a6 )p L roecsé cdounred ita iopnpsli c da'éblleec d tieovna dnet s e um xe s mobnrte f six é deus C poanrs l eai l l oa ii.nsi q ue
(2) L' organisation , le fonctionnement, la c omposition e t
Cleosu i rms m d'uanpiptéesl ,e int éj ulirgidibiciltiitoénss, ,i nl ecso m inpdaetmibniliittééss , e at tp trribivuiltèiogness d es
ldoei.s membres d u P arlement sont déterminés par la
17
17


pCoHuAvPoiIrTsR p Eu bI lics. E lle e st
nchaatiorgnéaele : ­L d 'A'esxsaemmibnleére l e s r ecours e n m atière d e contentieux
électoral
rméguinoincaipl ae l t; Article 15 ­ d e statuer en d ernier ressort
sreunr d leuss rp eacro u lerss j f uorrimdiéctsio c nosn itnrefé l reiesu j uregse me ne nc atss d déef in( 1it)i fL s 'A ssemblée
cnoamtiopnraelned cent q uatre­vingts membres ( cent quatre­vingts
administratifs ) élus a u suffrage u niversel direct e t secret
p­ oe uxra m unin m era, n toduast da eu t criensq lia tingse.s qui l ui sont e xpressément
dLéev noolumsb p rea r d leas l o mi.embres de l 'Assemblée nationale peut ê tre
modifié par la loi.
A(2rt)i cC leh a 4q1u e m embre de l'Assemblée nationale représente
lLaa N cahtaiomnb t roeu d t ee sn t cièorme.ptes e st c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t
estnattrueeprr i ssuers l p eus bc loiqmuepste est p puabrlaicpsu,b aliiqnusei q s.u ( e3 s ) uT ro cuet um xa d nedsa t imposé
e(4s)t E n unl ce at s n doen ca rviseen ug .rave o u lorsque les c irconstances l e
ljeu sP tirféiesnidt e, n t de la République p eut, a près consultation d u
Pl'Arésssiedmenbtl éd eu n Caotinosneaille c eotn dstuit uS téionnant,e d l e etm daensd beur rà e a l'Auxs sd eem blée
ndaétcioidnearl,e ­ dd e'e xaminer toute autre q uestion qui l ui est
esoxpnr m esasnédmaet.n Dt ad nésv o cleu e c ap sa,r l l'aé le loci.t iod ne dp 'ruonloen ngoeur vo eull ed 'a bréger
AArstsicelem 4b2lé ed aa n l sie uun délai d e quarante ( 40) jours a u m oins et d e
cent v ingt (120) jours a u plus a près l'expiration d u d élai de
poruo ld o'anbgraétigoenm ent. ( 1) L'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a
ccohmampobsreitsio qnu e'et l llees c a otmtrpibruetniodn, sl e d se c l oan Cdiotiuorn s su d per ês maies ie nte d dees c elles
e­ l clei sa is nosni q t f uixeé l sa p paror c laé d louir.e applicable d evant
(1) A u début d e chaque année l égislative, l ' Assemblée
lneast i coonnadleit i soen s r éf iuxnéiet s d e p a prl e lain l od ir.o ( i2t ) e L n' os regsasnioisna otirodnin, a leir e d ans
fdoensc t cioonunrse m d'aepnpt,e l la e ct o dmesp o trsibitiuonna e utx l e.s a ttributions
18
18


pCohuavqouires ap nunbéliec,s .l ' AE sllsee dmobitl é: e( 2 n ) a tionale tient trois (3) s essions o rdinaires,
rcehlaactiufsn a eu d x'u énleec dtiuornése r m égaixoinmaaleles d e et m 30u n (ticreipnatele)s j o; u ­r sst.a ­t ue exra md éinfienrit i lveesm r eecnot u rs
lseusr l es r ecours contre
jluitiggeems ea ndtms ir neinstdrautsif s p a; r ( al e)s À j u l'roiduivcetirotnusre i nd feé r sieau p reresm e inè r cea s se dses i on ordinaire,
­l' Ae xsasemminbelér e to nuat t aiountrael el i t éigliet sl uoin i np croémsidbeanntt ee tx lperse s mseémmbernets p daur lB a u lorei.a u.
­s us rta l etuse r re dcéofuinrsit iv ement
cjuognetrmee l ensts r endus par l es j uridictions inférieures e n c as de l itiges
saedsmsiinoinsstr,a lteif sb u; d( bg)e L t ' dAes s l'Éemtabt.l éL eo r nsaqtuioen caele b auddogpette n, ' aeus tc p oausrs a d d'oupnteé d aev as nets
hlaa f binili t dée à l 'e pxroerrocgiceer f inancier en cours , l e Président d e l a République est
d'un douzième l e b udget précédent jusqu'à l 'adoption d'un
nouveau budget.
(3) L 'Assemblée n ationale se r éunit en s ession extraordinaire
udn'u no erd d reu r déue j mouarx d imétaelrem d ineé q e utin àz el a ( d1e5m) jaonudrse s d uur P résident de la
dRééfpinuitbivlieqmuee n otu s du'ur nl e t sie j ursg e dme es ensts m embres. E lle s tatue
définitifs r endus par les c ours des comptes ; La s ession
elexqtruaeol re dlilnea air eé tp ér ec onndv foinq ud éèes qe uste é l'pourdisrée . du j our pour
AArrttiiccllee 4 127
((11)) L L 'eosr g saénainsacetios nd ,e l e l' A fosnscetmionbnléeem n eantito, nl aa l ceo smopnot sp ituiobnliq e ute l es.s
acottmribpurteionnds, ld ees lc ao Cndoiutiro ns us pd reê mr een v eot i d eens s céhaanmcber e às h q uuis'e lle
cmloasjo àri tl éa a dbesmoaluned ed ed u s e Psr é mseidmebnrte dse, al ain Rsié q puueb l liaq up er oo cué dd uer lea
applicable d evant elles , s ont f ixés p ar la l oi.
l(e2 ) f oL n'Acstisoenmnebmléeen n t,a ltaio cnoamlep éotsaibtiolitn p e atr s uonne r l èogi l (e2m) eL n'otr gi naténrisieautiro. n ,
adt'atrpibpuetli o ent sd ed se sj u croiduicrsti o ns,
19
19


Aportuicvleo ir 1s8 p ublics. E lle a p our
msuisivsaionnt :: ­ ( 1 e)x aL m'orinderer l deus jr oeucro d uers l ' rAeslasteifms ba luéxe én laetciotinoanlse est l e
rcéognifoénraelnecse e t municipales é tablis p ar la
rdeecso purrés s cidoenntrtes . l e ­ ss td aétuciesri oe nns d d eérfninieitri v reess s( o2r)t L s au r c o lensf é rence d es
pparérlseimdeennttsa eirsets c , od mesp op sréései d deenst s p rd éessid ceonmtsm disessi o gnrosu e pte d se s
mSeeumlsb rl eess pd ruo jB eutsr e au du contentieux a dministratif ; ( 3)
rdeele l voai n t de s a compétence e n v ertu d e l 'article 26 c i­dessous
pl'Aeussveemntb ê létree n i nasticornitas leà . l 'ordre du j our de
Article 41
aa)m Seonndte i mrreecnetsv a dbolnets l 't aoduotepsti op nro apuorsaiitti o pnosu rd ee fl foeit ed te r éduire
loeus d d 'éapuegnmseenst ep ru l belsiq c uheasr,g a eins sp i uq buleiq u ceelsle e st d leess e fonntrdesp r pisuebsli c s,
dju'égceomneonmtsie d méfiixntieti.f s E rlleen :d ­ u s st a ­ t ue définitivement sur l es
examine toutes a utres questions q ui l ui sont
leexsp j ruegsesmémenetnst dd ééfvinoiltuifess r e pnadr u las l ­o e i.s ­ t s s taaitsuiee p daérfi nl eit i Pverémseidnetn stu dre
lla'A Rsséepmubblliéqeu e , l e Président de
naaut i Coonnaslee i ol u c op nasrt i utunt i toienrnse d l ep so u mr e qmu'bilr s etsa t duee .l 'Assemblée nationale
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t l es
acottmribpuotsioennst , d lees l ac o Cnoduitri os nusp r dêem s ea eisti n dee,s l e csh ap mrobjeretss d q eu il ol ai
pert ol ecsé d purorep oa spiptiloicnasb d lee d loeiv q aun'te e lleu x a sa ocncte f pixtééss p aainrs lia q luoei .l a( 2 )
La'totrrigbauntiiosnasti od ne,s l e c o founrsc t dio'anpnpeeml e ent t d, el as c juormidpicotisointios n ju e dti c leiasi r es s ont
examinés ultérieurement.
20
20


Lpoorusvqouir'us np eu bp lriocps.o E siltlieo n: d e l oi n 'a pas é té e xaminée
eaxua c moiunrése d de' od fefiucex s àe l sas s ioensss io ornd o inradiirneasi rs eu scucievsasnitvee.s ­ , se tlaletu ees t
définitivement s ur les r ecours contre les jugements rendus par
1le9s ­ j ue rxidaimctiinoen,s à in l faé r ieures e n cas de litiges ; Article
dlietigmeasn q duei dl uui G s oonutv eexrpnreemsseénmt aednmt d inéisvtorlautsif p, at or ul as l aoui.tres
(1) Les l ois s ont v otées à l a m ajorité simple des membres d e
l'Assemblée nationale.
A(2r)ti c Llees 4 p 1r o jets de l oi s oumis à l'Assemblée nationale pour
esntatrtueeprr iss eusr l peusb c lioqmuepste e st pp uabralicpsu b aliinqsuie q su s eo s nut r s coeitu a xd d oepsté s, s oit
dreejse tc éosm cpotnefso r emsét m coemntp à é tl e'anrtteic pleo 3 u0r l ceis­d ceosnstorôulse.r L eat l cehsa rméebxrea m iner
(p3a)r L lee SP érénsaitd .ent de l a R épublique peut, a vant de
promulguer t oute l oi, d emander u ne d euxième lecture. D ans
ecen c d aesrn, ii el rs t raetsuseo d rté ,f i lneisti vp eromjeetnst d s eu r l ol ei s s o jungt e amdoepnttéss d àé f lian im tifas jor erintéd u s
mabesmobluree sd ed se l'Assemblée n ationale. C HAPITRE
II ­ e xaminer toute a utre q uestion qui l ui est e xpressément
ldoéi.volue par l a
Article 42
Article 2 0
(L1')o r ganisation, l e f onctionnement, la c omposition et l es
(a1tt)r i Lbeu tS ioénnsa d t e re l par éC soeunrt es u lepsrê j mureid eictt id oenss c réhgaimonbareless q eut' el ollcea les,
aleust o croitnédsi.tions de s aisine (2) C haque r égion e st représentée
saoun St é finxéaet sp a pra e r l llae sl o a i.i n1 s0i q( duiex )l as ép nroacteéudrusr ed o anptp 7 li c (saebplet) d s eovnatn ét lu eslle s
asuu r s u unffera b gaes u en riévgeirosneal li en d eitr e 3c ( t t rois) n ommés p ar l e
Président de l a R épublique.
21
21


(s3é)n L aetesu cra entd l eidsa p tse arsuo pnonsatleité dse n ommées au poste
adtete sinétn l a'âteguer d pea r q u lea Prarnétseid (e4n0t) d aen sl a à R l aé p duabteliq d uee l ' déoleivcetinotn a o vuo id r e
nlao mination . ­ s tatue d éfinitivement s ur les r ecours contre l es
ijnufgéermieuernetss d eénf i mniatitfisè r ree n ddeu lsit i pgaers le asd mj uirnidisictrtaiotinfss ; (4)
sLéen mataenudrsa t e d set s d e cinq (5) ans. A rticle 21 ­ examine t ous
aluui t sreosn t l ie tigxperse qsuséi ment d évolus p ar la loi.
(1) A u début d e chaque année l égislative, l e Sénat se
réunit d e p lein d roit e n session ordinaire A rticle 41 d ans
lceosn ditions fixées par la loi.
Lstaa t cuhearm sburre l e d se c so cmopmtepste p su e bslitc c so, m aipnésti eq nutee sp uoru cr ec uoxn t drôelse r e t
aennntréeep,r il see Ss ép nuabtl it qieunets t re oti s s e( 3m)i ­s peusbsliioqnuse so .r d( 2in )a Cirehsa q du'uen e d urée
maximale de trente (30) j ours c hacune.
IFl r éalnit ç saoisn P résident et les m embres d e s on Bureau. ­ statue
jduérifdinicittiivoenms e innfté s riueru l reess a d rerêst s c o dméfpinteitsif s; ( r3e)n dL ues S p éanra lte sse réunit en
seexstrsaioornd inaire p our u ne d urée n'excédant p as quinze (15) jours
sPurér su ind eo nrdt r dee d lau R joéupr ud béltiqeurme io nué d e 'tu àn l taie drse m dea ns dees d mue mbres .
­a ue txraem q iunees t toiounte q ui l ui e st expressément d évolue par l a loi.
ALart i sceles s 4i2o n e xtraordinaire p rend f in dès que l'ordre d u jour
p(1o)u L r 'l oerqguaenli s eallteio an ,é l teé fc oonncvtiooqnunéeem e esntt ,é l pau cisoém.position e t l es
attributions de la Cour s uprême et des chambres q ui l a
Acortmiclpeo 2 s2ent, les c onditions d e s aisine de c elles­ci a insi q ue
plaa p r rl ao c loéid. u (1re) L aepsp l sicéaabnlec ed se d vaun S t ée nllaets ss oonntt p f iuxbélsiq ues.
Exceptionnellement, le Sénat p eut t enir des séances à huis c los
a(2tt)r iL b'uotrigoannsi sd aetsio cno, ul ers f o dn'acptipoenln eetm deenst , j ul ari d ciocmtiopnoss j iutiodnic ie ati rl eess, à
loau d d eem l aan m dea jod ruit é P ra ébssidoelunet d dee ls ae Rs é mpeumblbiqruees.
22
22


pSoéunvaot i érsta p bulibt,l i pcsa.r I ul n deo il to :i ,( 2 s)o Lne r è glement i ntérieur.
­ e xaminer les r ecours relatifs aux litiges relatifs a ux élections
régionales
emt u nicipales ; A rticle 23 ­ s tatuer définitivement sur
lpeasr r leecso j uurrsid fiocrtimonéss ic nofénrtireeu lreess jue gne c mase n dtes l ditéigfiensit i afsd m reinndisutsra tifs ;
j(o1u) rL d 'our dS réen d aut e st établi par
lcao nférence d es présidents . ­ e xaminer t out autre l itige q ui l ui
est e xpressément dévolu p ar la loi.
Sénat. U n m embre du Gouvernement p articipe à la réunion de
lcao nférence. A rticle 41
ê(3tr)e S i enusclsr il tess à p l r' o ojredtsre d deu l o joi ur er ld eeva l an t C dhea s mab croem d peés t ceonmcep te ets p euvent
ceonm v petretus de es t l 'c aortmicpleé 2 te6n ctei­ dp eosusro c uosn, t srôolnetr L l eas C c hoammpbteres pd uebs li cs,
aeinntsrei pq ruisee c se d u'xé cd oenso mie m ixte. a)
qSuoin, ts i'rilrse c evables t ous l es p rojets de l oi et a mendements
éptuabielicnst ao duo dp'taéusg ,m aeunrateier nl et s p oc uhra r egffeest p dueb r léiqduueirse s leasn sf o r néddsu c tion
dcoersr e asuptroensd daénptee n ses o u d'octroyer des crédits n ouveaux
équivalents.
A(brt)i c Tleo u 4t2 d oute o u contestation s ur l a recevabilité d'un projet ou
Rd'éupnueb plirqoupeo,s ( i1tio) n L 'o dreg laoni ie ssatt ip oonr, tl ée p foanr c leti oP nrnéesmideenntt , d l ae l a
cooum d puo t sieitriso n d e e t l a le Cs oa uttrr is buuptiroênms ed u e tP dreéss i cdheanmt d bure Ssé q nua'et l le
ccoomnsptirteuntido,n l neesl c p oonudr itd ioéncsis id oen .s aisine du C onseil
p(4ro) c Lé'odrudrree ad pup jloicuarb d leosn n dee vp arinotr ie téu,x e dt é dcaidnéss l 'op radrr el e e Gt ol au v ernement,
àL 'o l'ergxaanmiseant id oens, l per foojentcst iod nen loeim e et n dte, s propositions d e l oi. ( 2)
ldae cso tmribpuonsaituioxn j ue dt i lceisa ia rettsr,ib a uctcioenpst éd se ps a cro luuri,s s do'anpt pf iexél es tp ar l a
loi . Les a utres p ropositions d e l oi
23
23


pchoaurvgoéires :p ­u d b'leicxsa. mE ilnlee re s let s r ecours relatifs a u c ontentieux
é­ ld eec t sotraatlu r eérg dioénfianli te ivt e mmuennict is puarl l;e s r ecours contre l es p ropositions
nd'ea y loain t pas é té e xaminées au cours d e deux sessions
jourrdidinicatiiroenss s iuncfécreiesusriveess e , nl e ms aj utgièerme ed net s c o rnetnednutise up xa r a ldems i nistratif ; ­
ds'ueixvaamntien,e lre ds' or effcicoeu,r sà c lao n sterses lieosn p o rrodpinoasiirteio n asd md ein liosti r;a ( t5iv)e T oute
àq ul 'eosrdtioren d inus jcoruitre e st,
àd el am ande du Gouvernement, t raitée e n urgence. ­ d'examiner, tout
autre litige q ui l ui e st e xpressément d évolu par l a l oi.
Article 24
A(1rt)i c Llees 4 l1o i s s ont votées à la majorité s imple d es sénateurs.
Français La chambre des c omptes e st c ompétente p our
cdoenst re ônletrre e ptr i ssteast up eurb s liuqru l eess e c to pmapratepsu p buliqbulicess,. a ( 2in) sL i e q u Seé ns autr p ceeuutx
da'mune n pdroejre o t u d e re lojei tq eur i t ol uuit e o sut s poaurtmiei s p our e xamen, c onformément
3à0 l ' a cri­tdiceles s ous. Elle : ­ s tatue
idnésftiannitcivee mp aern lta s luori. l (e3s) j Lueg e Pmréesnidtse d nét f dinei t liafs R reénpduubsliq eune p preeumt,i è re
cdoeuvrasn d t e less c omptes ; ­ e xaminer toute a utre
pqruoejesttiso n d eq u loi i l us oi e nst ta e dxopprteésss à é m lae mnta d joérvitoél u aeb.s Dolaunes d c ees c as, les
sénateurs .
APrAtiRclTeI E 42 I V
Rfoenlcattiioonnnse emnetrnet ,l 'el ax é ccoumtipf oe st i lteio l né ge its l leasti fp (o1u) vL o'oirrsganisation, l e
Article 25 Les a ttributions d e la Cour s uprême et d es
chambres q ui l a composent, l es c onditions de saisine de
caeinllseis q ­cuie l a procédure applicable d evant elles s ont fixées par l a loi.
Les projets de loi p euvent ê tre d éposés soit p ar le Président
ldee f ol an c Rtéiopnunbelimqueen,t ,s l oai t c poamr p leoss ip tioanrl ee mt l eenst a ires. ( 2) L'organisation,
attributions d es c ours d'appel e t d es juridictions,
24
24


AProtiucvleo i 2rs6 p ublics. I l est c hargé
dPea r:l e( 1m) eL n'at.d ­ o l p'etixoanm deens d peros je retsc o duer s lo rie p laatri f lse a ux élections
rlééggiisolnaatilfe s e t m unicipales . ( 2) Sont r éservés au contentieux
l­e s st ap touuevr o eirns d seurinviaenr t rse :ssort s ur l es r ecours c ontre les
gdaércaisnitoienss e f itn l aelse s ju ( gae)m L eens t ds r roeitnsd fuosn dp aamr leens tj auurixd,i cl etiso n s
ionbféligriaetuiorenss e dnu m atière d '
cciotonyteennt i:e ux a dministratif ; 1 . l a sauvegarde d e la l iberté e t
dlees ll aib seértcéusr ip téu b inlidqiuviedsu e; l­ l ee sx a; m2 .i n leesr r toèugtle a su rtéreg il sitsigaen tq ui l ui est
leéxgpisrelastsioénm ent d évolu par la loi. 3. la législation du travail, la
syndicale, l es règles q ui l a régissent, l a sécurité
esno c miaaleti è erte l e s assurances ; 4 . l es d evoirs et obligations du citoyen
dFera dnéçfaeins sL ea n cahtaiomnablree. d Aersti c cleo m 41ptes est c ompétente p our
cceounxtr ôd leesr e etn s trteapturiesre s su pr ul ebsli q cuoemsp etet s p ap ruabpluicbsl,iq a uinessi. q 1 u. e n as tuior n alité,
éptearts d oensn e s, r égime m atrimonial,
dseurcncieesr s ions e t l ibéralités ; E lle est c ompétente pour : ­ s tatuer en
rdeésfsinoitritf ss u rer nl edsu s ju p gaerm leesn t cso urs d e première i nstance ; 2 . r ègles
rbéiegnisss a mnot bl eilise r osb ligations civiles et commerciales ; 3 . r égime des
eetx pi mremsosébmilieernst ;d ­ é e vxoalumei np earr t loau l otei. a( cu)t r Le' oq rugeasntiisoant i qouni p l uoil ie tisqtu e,
ajuddmiciinaiisretr a: t ive et
Article 42 : 1 . r ègles régissant l'élection d u Président
dReé p lau blique et
Cleosu é r les uctpiorênms eà el 'At d sseesm chbaléme bn raetsio dnua l Seé, nl east ,a dtterisb u cotiollencst id veit é las
treérfréitroerniadluems e ; ta c inosmi pq rueen dl a, pl erso c céodnudrietio anpsp dlicea sbaleis id neev daun t
eplolelisti q 2u. e rès g; ls eosn r té f gixiséseasn pt al ers l a a s losio. c3 i.a lt'ioorngsa ne its laetsio p na, rl teis
faotntrcibtiuotnionnesm e etn l et,s l e rse s sources des c ollectivités t erritoriales ; (2)
Ld'eosrg c aonlliescattiivointé, sl e t e forrnitcotrioianlense m; ent, la composition e t les r essources
devoirs des cours d'appel e t d es juridictions judiciaires,
25
25


cphoaurvgoéiers : p 4 u. b dliecss . r èE glllee se s gté nérales d 'organisation d e la
d­ éd f'eenxsaem ninaetiro lneasl er e ;c ours e n m atière d'élections régionales e t
mdeusn i cipales ; 5 . de l'organisation j udiciaire e t d e la création
cdoivnetersn t;i et yupxe s de juridictions ; ­ d e s tatuer e n d ernier
dreésfisnoitritf s s ur er nl edsu sr e pcaoru lress f oj urrmidéicst ic oonnst ri en fl éersie j uurgeesm eenn m tsa tière d e
ccoivnitlee,n mtieeusxu aredsm inistratif pénal ; p rocédure , procédure
­d d'e'exxéacmutiinoenr, t out autre l itige d évolu expressément à
sl'uaimvannistetise .: ( d) Les matières f inancières et p atrimoniales
1le. l beusd rgèegtl e; s3 .r é lag i ssant l'émission de l a monnaie ; Article 41 2 .
création d es fonctions et la détermination d e
dle'iumrsp ob saistieosn ,
tdaeu x c ee ut xm d oud ar elictéosu v dree m rèegnlet m puebnlti c d e;s comptes p ublics, ainsi q ue
et d es entreprises semi­publiques. 4 .
dmui n réegsi m; 5e. f oncier, d es domaines de l'État et d es
dsetast ur ees e sno u drecrensi e nra rteusresollerts s . u ­ r l es jugements d éfinitifs rendus p ar les
jéucriodnicotimoniqsu iensfé e rite ures ; (e) P rogrammation des objectifs d es t ribunaux
daecsti oc no ms opcteiasl e; . ­ e xamine t outes autres questions qui l ui sont
deéxvporelusessé m paern lta l oi. ( f) Du système éducatif.
AArrttiiccllee 2 472
Lseosn t m ( 1a)ti è Lr'oersg qaunii sn aeti o sno,n l te p faosn c rétisoenrnveémese n atu, l p ao cuovmoipr o lésgitiisolna te ift
lqeus' ea ltlteri be ustti o hnasb id liteé e la à C é oduirc ts eurp drêems reè egtle dse e st cr hèagmlebmreens t s.
Aarut icp loeu 2v8o iL r el ésg m islaattiièf rs eosn q t uf iix n éee ss o pnatr p laa s lo ri.éservées
(l1'a)r tT icoluet e2 f6o i( s2,) e cni­ d cees qsuuis c , ol 'nocrgearnneis al etsio s nu, jl eet s fo énncutimonénreéms à e n t, l a
dceosm jpuorisdiitciotino ne st j lueds ica itatriirbeust i,o lnes P d aersle cmoeunrst p de'aupt ph ealb eilti t er le
26
26


Loerd P onrénsaidnecen tp doeu r la u Rneé pd uubréliqeu e légifère p ar voie d '
lmimaittiéèere e d t ' péoleucrt id oenss o rébgjeiotsn d aéletse r emt i mnéusn.i cI li pe axlaems.i n( 2e) l eC se sr e cours en
oErldleosn s noanntc es entrent e n vigueur à l a date d e l eur publication.
dnéaptioonséaeles ed te dvua n Sté l neas tb puoruera ul exs d j uégfienmitifesn dtse r le'Ansdsuesm blée
fpixaér lp easr ju lar i ldoiic d tio'hnasb i ilnitfaétriioenu.r e Esll ee sn o c nats u dne c r aartaifcictèarteio n dans le délai
aradtmifiiéneisst r.a ­t i f tant qu'elles n'ont p as été e xpressément
edxéavmoluin e p a tor u t autre l itige qui lui est e xpressément
la l oi .
(3) E lles restent en vigueur a ussi longtemps q ue le P arlement
An'rati c plaes 4 r1e f usé de les r atifier.
La chambre d es comptes e st c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t
statuer
Article 2 9 s ur les c omptes p ublics, ainsi q ue sur c eux des
eloni te ret p leriss ep sro ppuobsliitqiouness d eet d lo'éi cs oonnot m ie mixte. (1) L es projets d e
dnéaptioosnéasle s imultanément d evant les b ureaux d e l ' Assemblée
ecto d mup S étéennatet.s E allveasn st ol enut ré stuédainécees pp laérn lieèsre c .o ­ m s mtaitsuseinotn ds é finitivement
seuxra m lesin aernrtê ts d éfinitifs r endus par leurs cours des comptes ; ­
teoxupteress asuétmreesn qt ud eésvtoioluness q p uai rl e lau r l o sio. n( 2t ) L e p rojet de l oi
ddéévboaltutu p e anr ls eé ance p lénière e st c elui q ui l ui est e xpressément
Président de l a République. L e p rojet de l oi débattu en s éance
apulétneiuèrrse. est l e Article 42 déposé ensuite par son ou s es
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t ( 3)
Catetrsib p urtoiojentss d dee l lao i C p oeuurv s eunpt r êêtmree m eot d diefisé s c h daamnsb rl 'eesx eq ruc'ieclele d es
comprend , l es c onditions de l eur saisine ainsi q ue la
procédure applicable d evant elles s ont f ixés p ar l a loi.
(P1o) rT taonutt s p urro lj'eotr gd aen loisia v toiotné, p l ea rf o l'nAcstsioenmnbelméee n nta, tl iao nc aolme p eosst i( t2io)n
ePtr é lessid aetntrti b duet i lo'Ansss deemsb cléoeu rn sa dti'oanpapleel. et du S énat par le
27
27


(r2é)c eL pet iP orné dsiud ep nrot j deut d Seé lnoai tt ,r ad nèssm is par l e Président de
l­' Ae sxsaemminbelé l ee sn ar eticoonuarlse r,e lela t sifosu a muext éà l el 'cetxioanmse r né g diuo nS aélensa t e. t
mdéucnisicioipnasl e s ; ­ statue d éfinitivement s ur l es r ecours contre l es
cdoémfinpittievre d se ( 3 la) D daatnes d uens dj uéglaeim d een 1 ts0 r ( etonnd)u j so up rasr, l àe s j uridictions
i(ncfiénrqie) u joreusrs e p no cuar su n d e p r roéjceet pd teio nl o id dué p crloajreét ud reg e loni to p ua dr e le 5
Gauoturev e lirtnigeem qeuni tl ,u l ie Sénat peut : ­ examiner , t out
eesxtp ressément
ddeé v looil ua .d Doapntés a cue P caréss, i ldee Pnrt é dseid l e'Ansts deum S bélénea t n raetniovnoaiele l e p a prr o laje l ot i.
Article 4 1 l'Assemblée q ui le transmet dans u n délai de q uarante­huit
(hquuiat)r ah netuer e ­ s a u Président de la République pour p romulgation.
La chambre d es comptes e st c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t
pstuabtulicesr , s auirn s lei s q uc oem s uprte c se ux d es e ntreprises publiques e t
pUanr at eplu abmliqeunedse.ment doit être approuvé p ar une m ajorité
sEilmlep le des s énateurs.
dl'Aosits :e D mabnlés e c en a ctaiosn, al ele p proajre lte d Per l éosi i admenetn ddué S e ésnt ar et n pvoouyré r éà e xamen.
d­ és ftiantiutiev e ment s ur l es a rrêts définitifs rendus par l es
cjuormidpictteiosn ;s ­ ie nxféarmieiunree st o d uetess autres q uestions q ui l ui sont
eLx'apmreesnsdéemmeennt td p érvooplouseés p paarr l lea S loéi.nat est a dopté o u rejeté
à l a majorité s imple des m embres de l ' Assemblée
nationale.
LPeré p sriodjeent td dee l o l'Ai d sésfeinmitbivléeem n eantti o andaolpet éa u e sP tr térsaindsemnti s d pea l ar l e
Rfoénpcutibolniqnueem p eonut,r l p ar coommuplgoastiitoionn. ( e 1t) leL s'o a rgttarinbiusatiotionns ,d lee l a
Cl'Aosusre s mubplréêem nea etito dneasle c choammpborertse d lees c onditions d e saisine
pdreo c ceésd u dreer n aipèprelicsa abinles id q euvea nl at e lles . Ce rejet d oit être approuvé
à la majorité a bsolue d es sénateurs.
(2) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t l es
jautdtriicbiuatirioenss, D daens s c o ceu r csa ds',a l pep perl o ejet t d dees tl oriib ruenjeatuéx e t m otivé e st
renvoyé à l 'Assemblée n ationale par le
28
28


p­ o du'evxoairms in peurb l liecss . r eE clloeu e rss tr e chlaatirfgsé aeu :x élections régionales et
mpruonjeict id pea lel osi à ; 1 la. L m'Aasjosreitmé ba lébeso n luaeti od nea slee,s a mpreèms b dréelisb.é ­r ad teio snt,a a tudeorp te le
sduérf i lneisti vr eemcoeunrts c ontre les d écisions définitives des j uridictions
qinuféi lruiei u ersets e exnp r ceasss é dme e lintitg deés v;o ­l u d 'p eaxra ml a inl oei r., 2 t o. uL to a rsuqtruee l i ltaig m e a jorité a bsolue
nceo n pveouqtu ê etrr eu na ett e cionmtem, l eis s Pioréns m ideixntet dp ea r laita R iréep c uobmliqpuoes ép ee ud te
dreepurxé s cehnatmanbtrse sd e s
pprooupro ser une formulation c ommune d es d ispositions rejetées p ar le S énat.
Article 41
sLtaa t cuhearm subrr el e d se c so cmopmtepste psu e bslitc c so, m aipnésit eq nutee sp uoru cr ec uoxn td rôelse r e t
elan ctroemprmisiesss ip ounb mliqixutees e estt ss eomumi­pisu abuliqxu deesu. x L e C ht eaxmteb ré elasb p oarré p ar
lReé P pruébsliidqeunet p doeu lra a pprobation.
EFlrlaen :ç A auisc un amendement n'est r ecevable, sauf a vec l'
daépfpinroitbivaetmione nd tu s u Prr él essid a ernrêt t dse d l éaf i Rnéitipfsu b reliqnudeu.s ­ p satra t ue
cleosm c potuerss ;d ­e e sx amine t oute a utre q uestion lui incombant
Rexéppruebslsiqéumee pnet up ta :r ­ l es so id t ed uexm c ahnadmerb r àe l s'A, sl es e Pmrébsliédee n nta dtieo nl aa l e
ddéef i sneit i pvreomnoennct es ru r c e texte ; A rticle 42 ( 1) L 'organisation,
le fonctionnement, l a composition e t les a ttributions d e la C our
sduepsr ê chmaem ebtr es q ui l a
lcao pmrpoocésednutr,e l e asp pc loicnadbitlieo nd se v daen s t a eilsleinse s doen tc f eixlléeess ­ pc ai r a i lnas lio q i.ue
(1) L e P résident de la République p romulgue les l ois. (2)
dLé'olirbgéarnaitsioantios nd ,e l es C foonucrtsio d n'naepmpeeln et,t l dae cso jmurpidoiscittiioonns e , ta l deosp tées p ar
elen tP réaerl e emn ef onnt c dtaionnss l e, s lu q i us ionnzte t r (a1n5s) m joiuserss d àe m l eouinr s q u'il n e
demande u ne deuxième l ecture o u n e s aisisse le C onseil constitutionnel.
29
29


pouvoirs p ublics. I l doit : C onseil.
(c2a)r e An l c'eex dpuir aP tiroéns id dee n cte d deé llaa iR , eétp aupbrlièqsu e a v, o leir Pc orénssitdaetén t l ad e
nl'Aastisoenmalbel é pee u t l ui­même p romulguer la loi. ( 3) Les l ois
esonn a t np gulabilsié eets e a nu f Jraonuçrnaaisl. o­ f f eicxiaeml d inee l ra l e Rsé rpeucboliuqruse e n
rmégaitoiènrael ed se e c to m ntuennitcieipuaxl ed se ;s ­ é sletacttuioenr sd éfinitivement sur
lleess j r uegceomuresn ctso n retrned us par les juridictions inférieures e n m atière
cdoen tentieux administratif ; ­ e xaminer, t out
autre litige qui l ui e st expressément d évolu par l a loi.
Le Président de la R épublique p eut, à s a d emande,
sà' al 'dArsessesmerb lée n ationale, au S énat o u a ux deux C hambres
rméeusnsieasg e esn ; c m onagisrè asu. cI lu pneeu dt eé gc aelse m adernets l seeusr o aud rm esessesra dgeess n e
epsetu ct oê mtrep é dtéebnatett up eo u ern c soan t prôrélesre e ntc set a. t Luae rc hs uarm l ebsre c d oemsp cteosm ptes
epnutbrelicpsri,s aeisn s pi u qbulieq u seusr c e et ud xe s d ee sn t reprises d 'économie mixte.
Article
r3e3n dE ullse ps atar t ue e n dernier ressort s ur l es jugements d éfinitifs
ilnefsé j ruieriudriecsti od ness c omptes ; L e Premier ministre e t les
eatu p treeusv m enetm, ebnre vse d rtuu G d eo ul av el orni,e p maertnict ip oenrt a àc sceèss da éul ibP éarraletimonesn.t
AArrttiiccllee 34 42
(d1e) f Linoarsn cd ees l a e ss te esxsaiomni na éu, c leo u Prrse d meie l ar q muienlilset rl ee p prréosjeetn d tee àl o li'
fAinsasnecmiebrl,é seo n caiatilo e nta c leu lt leu rp erl od gur a Gmomuvee é rnceomnoemnti.q ( u1e),
aLt'otrribguatnioisnast io dne, la le C f oonucrt is ounpnreêmmeen et,t l dae cso cmhpaomsbitrioens qe ut ' leelsle
acoinmsip qreuned l a, l perso c céodnudriteio anpsp dlieca s baleis id neev d aen tc eelllleess ­ scoi n t f ixées p ar la
(lo2i). Le Premier ministre peut, a près délibération d u C onseil des
dm'ainpipsterle e st, d coens f jiuerri dl aic r teiosnpso n jusdaicbiialitirée d s,e a s u fo G noctuiovnesrn deemse cnot ud resv ant
lle'A c sasse,mblée n ationale sur u n programme o u, s elon
30
30


gsuérn é urnaele d . é aculatorarittiéosn p dueb p liqouliteiqsu. e E l le
ddoeimt :a L ned e v od tee v a o l tiee u d ea ud ém fioainncse 4 .8 ­ ( eqxuaamrainnteer­ h leusit )r eh ceouurress r aeplartèifss l aau x
élections r égionales et m unicipales . contestations ; ­ s tatuer
dsuérfi nl eitsiv r eemcoeunrts contre l es jugements définitifs. Une
mmeomtiobnre d se d deé l f'i a Anscsee me sbtl é pero a ndomncinéies t àra ltaiv me an jaotrioitén aa leb.s o Sleuuel sd el ess
tvooutet sa u ctoren tl rietig u en l uv io te de c onfiance s ont comptés . ­ examiner,
incombant
expressément p ar la loi.
(2) L 'Assemblée n ationale p eut mettre en c ause l a
Creestpteo nm soatbioilnit é du G ouvernement p ar u ne m otion de c ensure. A rticle 41
mn'eesmt br erecse vd aeb l l'eA sq sueem s bi l eélele n e asttio sniganleé.e L pea v ro a teu nm 'ao i lniesu u qnu t eie s rsi e dleles
estnattrueep r sisuer s le p su cbolimqupetes s e pt up balriacps,u a bilniqsui e qsu.e E slluer dc oeiut x: sd teastu er d éfinitivement
smuer ml ebsr ea srr êd tes l d'Aésfisneitmifsb lr éeen dn uasti o àn uanlee. m ajorité d es deux tiers des
cSoemulpst e le. s v otes f avorables à u ne m otion de c ensure s ont pris en
Lpau bc lhicasm, a birnes d i qeus ec oc meupxt ed se es se t n ctoremppriésteesn t peu p boliquur ec so n ettr ô plaerra l peusb c lioqmuepste. s
Eunllee d moaitj o: rs ittéa t uer définitivement sur l es a rrêts d éfinitifs rendus à
dleess v doeteusx f taievrosr a dbelse sm à e mu nbere m s o dteio l n'A dsese c menbsléuer en as otionnt a plreis . eS ne uls
compte. e xaminer toute a utre
question l ui d évolue e xpressément par l a loi.
Lorsqu'une motion de c ensure e st r ejetée, ses signataires n e p euvent
apnro, p soasuef rd uannes n ouvelle m otion avant u n d élai de l 'article 4 2 d 'un
l(e1s) Lc a'osr gp arnéivsuasti oa nu, p lea r faognrcatipohnen e( 4m).ent, l a composition e t les
attributions d e l a Cour s uprême et d es chambres qui l a
pcoamr lpao losei. n( t4 ,) aL ien sP i r qeumei el ar m prioncisétdreu r pee aupt,p a lipcraèbsl ed é dleibvéarnatt i eolnle sd ,u s ont f ixés
pCrooncséediul dree sa pm pilnicisatbreles , d leevsa snat il suiri. ainsi que la
Lce'A c sases,m ( b2l)é l e'o rs gea p nrisoantoionnc,e l es u for n l'actdioonpntieomn ed n'utn, l a p r coojemt pd oes l iotiio. n D eatn lse
pmrootjeiotn d d ee lo ci ep nesuuvreen, tr eê ltaretiv c eo a nusixd é dreévso i cros m demse c a oduorsp t dé'sa,p s paeul f s i une
et d es tribunaux, est déposée dans l es 2 4 heures q ui s uivent.
31
31


pdoaunvso lierss pc ounbdlicitsio. n Esl le p rs étvautuees à l'alinéa p récédent. ( vingt­
qcounatteren)t ih eeuuxr dees.s ­ é elexcatmioinnse r léegsi o rencaoleusrs e r te mlautinfsic a ipua les ; ( 5)
Ll'Aosrssqeumeb lée n ationale adopte u ne m otion de censure d éfinitive ou
pvoatre l eu sn j eu rm idoictitoionn d se in cfeénriseuurree,s l e esn j mugaetimèreen d tse r ceonndtuesn t ieux
aredcmoinndisutriraet if le ; P( 6r)e Lmeie Pr rm ésinidisetnret d dea n las R seésp u fobnlicqtuioen p se eutt l ui
dfoermmaenr du enr n doeu veau Gouvernement . ­ examine t out
aquuti rl eu i l i etisgte e xpressément d évolu par l a l oi .
AArrttiiccllee 4 315
Lsuar C l eosu rc od mesp t ceosm pputbelsic e ss, t a cinosmi p qéutee ns uter pc eouuxr c doenst re ônletrre e ptr i ssteastu er
pduub G liqouuevse re nte p maeranpt u pbalri qd ueess q. u Eellset i eosnts c o hraarlgeése o :u d éec criotenstr e ôtle p ra l 'ra lcat i on
cdroétaéteiosn d d ee a cttorimbumtiiosnssio s npsé d c'iefinqquueêst e.
­ju s rtidaitcuteio dnésf i inniftéivrieemureenst ; s ( u2r) l e Lse j Gugoeumveernntesm deénfitn, its ifosu rse rnédsuesr vp ea rd e less
ilma p déérfeantifsse d n ea tionale, de la sécurité de l'Etat o u du secret d e
el'ixnpsltircuacttioionns p e ét n inafloer, mf oautrionnits a. u­ e Pxaarlmemineen t to t uotuetse a s u tres
qsuoenst te ioxnpsre qsusié l muie nt d évolues p ar l a l oi.
(3) A u cours d e chaque s ession ordinaire, une s éance
sApréticcilael e4 2 est réservée c haque s emaine à la p ériode des q uestions.
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a c omposition e t les
adtetr i lbau C tioounrs s uprême et des chambres q u'elle comprend,
laepsp c liocnadbilteio d nesv d aen t s e alilseisn e s od net cf iexléless p ­cair al ain l soi i.q (u1e) l Lae p rocédure
PPrrééssiiddeenntt d dee ll aa C Roéupru b coliqnusetit up teiount,n a epllreè,s l e cso n sasuislitra d tioen t od uut e affaire
Cquoin lsuei i el,s lte s Pourémsiisdee.nt d e l'Assemblée n ationale et ( 2) L'organisation,
sleo uf omnecttitoennnt ea mu e rénfté, r lean cdoummp o dseisti o Cno eutr s le d P 'arpépseidl ee nt t d deus S j uérindaict,t i ons
jnuodrimciaailreems,e tnotu r té p sreorjveét d aeu r péofuovrmoier lq éugii,s b laietifn, pq ouuer rait a voir de
profondes conséquences.
32
32


pmoisusviooinrs : p du'ebxliacms.i nE ellre l ea s p roeucro urs r elatifs au contentieux é lectoral
rpérgoijoentsa d l eet lo mi,u pnoicritpaanlt ;o arg )a l neiss a tion d es p ouvoirs publics o u modifiant l a
bC)o l nesst ip turotiojents ; d e loi portant r atification
dd'earcncieorr d res so suo r dt es u trra l ietéss r e inctoeurnrsa tf ioornmauéxs ; c o­ n dtere s tl eastu deér ce insi o ns finales d es
ejunr i mdiacttiioènres d inef é croienuterensti e ux a dministratif ; a yant d es conséquences
pimaprtoicrutalinètreesm ;e c n)t c ertains projets de loi de réforme du d roit d es p ersonnes
et des biens.
(2) Ces p rojets d e loi s ont a doptés à la m ajorité d es v oix e xprimées.
Article 41
Lparo cchéadmurber er é dféerse n codmairpete ess et s fitx é coem p paér tl ean l otei. p our c ontrôler e t ( 3) L a
statuer sur l es c omptes publics, a insi q ue sur ceux des e ntreprises
publiques e t parapubliques.
Echllaer egséte :
TjuITdiRciEa iV re P ­ od uev sotiar t uer e n dernier ressort sur l es j ugements d éfinitifs rendus
par les j uridictions
idnefésr i ceoumrepst e s ; Article 3 7 ­ d'examiner toute a utre q uestion q ui lui est
e(1x)p Lreas s juésmticeen te dsét v reonludeu p ea sru l ar l l eo i t.erritoire de la R épublique au n om du p euple
camerounais.
ALret icp loeu 4v2o i( r2 j u) d iciaire e st exercé p ar l a C our s uprême, l es cours d 'appel e t
lceosm t rpibousnitiaounx e. t( 1l e) sL ' aotrtgriabnuitsioantiso n d,e l e la f oC nocutiro s nunpermêmenet , e l ta d es chambres
squup'erlêlem c eo e mt p drue n pdo,u avionisr i lé qguies l laetsif ,c s oonndti ti inodnésp deen d saainstisn e d ud ep o lau vC ooiru e r x écutif .
Lréegsi s m u angiqisutreamtse d nut p saièr gl ae ls ooi ne tt, ld eaunr sc ol 'nesxceirecniccee d: e( 2 l e) uL r'os rf goanncitsioantiso,n ,
jlued fiocniacitrieo n snoenmt f eixnéts, l p aa cro l ma p looi.s (it i3o)n L e et Pl 'irnédséidpeenntd daen cl ae R dué pp uobulviqouire g arantit
dleus pa otturivbouirti oj undsi c diaeisre c.o Iul nrso md 'ampep el el s e tm embres d e l a
chambre e t d u ministère public.
33


pceotutevo tiârsc h peu bp laicr s le. IC l eosnts aesils sisutpéé draienusr de la m agistrature , q ui lui donne s on
saavnisc s tiuorn st o duiss c leipsl il nitaigireess ;. n Lo'omrginaantiisoantsio à n le at m l ea f goinstcrtaiotunrnee e mt es nutr d l eus
sCuopnésreieilu r d e la m agistrature sont définis par l a l oi. A rticle 38 : il e xamine
ltao u losi .l es a utres l itiges q ui l ui s ont e xpressément d évolus par
(1) La Cour s uprême e st l a p lus haute juridiction d e l'État en matière
juridique et administrative a insi q u'en m atière d'évaluation d es c omptes.
c(2h)a Emllber e c o dmesp r ceonmd p: t Leas e st compétente pour c ontrôler e t s tatuer sur l es
cpoamrapptuebsl ip quubelsic.s, ainsi q ue s ur ceux des e ntreprises publiques et
AErllteic eles t 3 c 9o mpétente p our :
­ s tatuer e n d ernier ressort s ur les j ugements d éfinitifs r endus p ar l es juridictions
ienxféarmieiunreers t o; u ­ t es
aleust rr eesc o muarsti è ardems iq su pi a luri l s ao lnoti c eoxnptrrees sl eésm d eéncti s diéovnosl ud eésfi np iativr el as lr oei n; d­ u eexsa pmainr el ers
dtriifbféurneanutexs d ceo lu'orrsd eret j udiciaire ; Article 4 2 (1) L'organisation, l e fonctionnement, la
composition et l es a ttributions d e l a C our suprême e t des j uridictions inférieures,
acionnsdi qitiuoen sl e s
jdueri d siacitsioinnes d inef él ari e loui,r e cso,m lepsr ec nonnednitti ol enss ad tetr i sbauistiionnes d dee l a la l o Ci o duarn s su l persê m afefa eirte d s e s
doéùv eolllueess s poanrt l c ao lnotie. s­ te éxeasm, ­ i nt oeur t teosu t mesa t aièurteress q muia l utièi s reosn tq e uxi pl urie ssosnétm e exnptr e ssément
ddééfvinoiltuiveess p raern l dau leosi ;p ­a e r xl easm d inifefér r leens tr eesc c oouursrs a e dtm t risib puanra ul ax lo die c ontre les décisions
jlu'orriddircet i joundsic iinafiéreri e; u­ r setsa,t u aeinr se i n q u dee rl neise rc o rensdsitoiortn ssu d r e le ssa jiusgineem deen t las r loein, d duasn sp a ler sl e a sf f aires
où elles sont c ontestées, ainsi que l a procédure a pplicable d evant elles, sont f ixés par l a l oi.
d(2e)s L C'oorugrasn isation, le f onctionnement, la c omposition e t l es attributions
4d0'a.p L pae l c ehta dmebsr ej u a riddmictiinoinstsr a jutidviec ie axiraems is noen t to duésf i lneiss l àit i lg'aersti c le
administratifs i mpliquant l'État et les autres .
34


cphoaurvgoéires :p puobulivcosi.r sE lp leu be lsict s . E lle
ecostn c tehnatrieguéxe d : e­ sd ' éelxeacmtioinnesr r léegsi o rencaoleusr s e t e mn um naictiièprael ed se ; ­
lde'es xr aemcoinuersr
eetn m muantiicèirpea dlees c;o ­n d teen stiteautuxe dr e dsé f éinleitcivtieomnse nr ét gs iuorn laelse s
jruercidoiucrtsio cnosn intrfeé r leiesu j ruegse e mne mntast i dèérefi nd ietif sc o rnetnednutise u pxa r l es
da'd e mxianmistinraetrif t;o ­ u t
aquuti rl eu i l i etisgte
eqxupi r lueis essétm eexnptr ed sésvéomlue pnat rd léav l ooliu. ­ p d a're lxaa lmoii n.er t out a utre litige
AArrttiiccllee 4 4 11
Lstaa t cuhearm s burre le d se c so c mopmtepste p su e bslitc c so, m aipnésti eq nutee s p uoru c r ec uoxn td rôelse r et
econmtreppteriss ee ss tp cuobmliqpuéetes ne tte p p aoruarp uc obnliqtruôelesr. e L ta s ctahtaumerb sreu rd l eess
cceoumxp d teess pe unbtrliecpsr,i sa einss pi uq buleiq s uuers e t parapubliques .
Echllaer e gséte
ddéef i:n E itlilfes e r esnt d cuhsa r pgaére l ed se ju: r­ i ds itcattiuoenrs e innf éd reiernuireers r e; s­ s sotartt us eurr e lens d j uegrneimere r netsss ort
sduérf in leitsif s ju r geenmdeuns t s
pluai r e lsets e j xuprirdeicstsioénmse inntf é dréievuorluees ;p ­a r e xl aa m loii.n ­e r e xt oaumtein aeur tt roeu q teu ea suttiroen q ui
qeuxpersetisosné q muei n lut id eésvto lue p ar l a l oi.
AArrttiiccllee 4 422
a(1tt)r iL b'uotrigoannsi sd aet i loan C, l oeu fro s nucptiroênmneem eet n dte ,s l ac h caommbproessi tq ioun'e e llet l e s
scaoimsipnree na din,s lie q su c eo nl ad pitirooncsé dd uer es a aispipnleic a, bl eles c d oenvdaintito enlsle d se
sont f ixées p ar la loi. sont f ixées par la loi.
a(2tt)r iL b'uotrigoannsi sd aetsio c no, ul ers f o dn'acptipoenln eetm deenst c, ol au r cso jmudpiocisaitirioens ,e t l es
35
35


pchoaurvgoéires :p d uebsli c csh.a E mllber eesst a dministratives e t inférieures d es
cporomcpétdeusr e a i anpsip qlicuaeb d lee sd e cvoanndti te iollness d ees tl ef iuxré s ea p isairn el a e lot id . e ­ s l ata tue
reens s doerrtn s ieurr les recours formés c ontre les jugements d éfinitifs
rpeanrd l uess juridictions inférieures en m atière d e
contentieux a dministratif ; T raités et accords internationaux
­to euxta a muitnree ,l i tige
qluui e d é lalè lgoui e e xpressément .
Français L e Président de la République négocie e t r atifie l es
taraccitoérsd est i n ternationaux. A rticle 41 L a C hambre des comptes est
acoinmsip q éuteen steu rp c oeuur xc o dnetsr ô elnetrr ee pt r sitsaetsu e pru s bulirq l ueess c e otm ppatreasp puubbliqlicuse,s .
pleosu avcociro l rédgsi si nlatteifr nt ealtlieo n qauuex d q éufiin rieel èà v l e'anrtt icd lee l 2 a6 c c oim­dpeéstseunsc e. E dlule e st
scuhra r legsé e ju :g ­e dmee snttast ud eérfi n diétiffisn i rteivnedmues np ta r les juridictions i nférieures
dcoems ptes ; Article 44 Lorsque l e
Conseil c onstitutionnel d éclare inconstitutionnelle u ne d isposition
do'u u d n' u trna i atéc c ord
itnrateitrén ao tuio ancacl,o l r'da us toonrits d aitfifoénr é dees r jautsifqicua'àti ol an r eétv lias ir oant if dicea l taio n dudit
Constitution.
(1) L 'organisation, le f onctionnement, la c omposition et l es
attributions d e la Cour suprême e t des chambres q u'elle
cleosm cpornednidti o, n s d e saisine des traités e t accords internationaux
ddûemvaennt t e a llpepsr os ounvét sf i x oéus r paatirf iél as l oa ii.n (s2i ) q L u'eo r lgaa p nrioscaétidounr, el e a pplicable
efot n lecsti oa nttnreibmuteionnt,s l ad e cso m copuorssi td io'anp pel e t des tribunaux
judiciaires,
36
36


pPoaurtvieo iV rsI I publics. Il est chargé : Le
lCeos nr seeciol u crosn e sntit u mtiaotniènreel d ­ ed ' ceoxnatmenintieeru x é lectoral r égional e t m unicipal ;
Article 46 ­
ddee r sntiaetru r eers e sno r t s ur les r ecours formés c ontre l es arrêts
dCéofinnsiteifisl cr oennsdtuitsu t pioanr n leesl e j usrti dc iocmtiopnést e innfté erine u mreasti è erne m dea t Cièornes dtietu Ltieo n . Il s tatue
sl'ourrg lea nc eo n rétegnutliaetuexu ra dministratif ; s ur la c onstitutionnalité d es l ois. I l e st
fdoun c tionnement des institutions. ­ d 'examiner t out autre litige qui l ui est
expressément d évolu p ar la l oi.
Article 4 7
ALret icC leo n4 s1e i (l1 c)o nstitutionnel s tatue en dernier ressort sur : L a chambre
deests c coommppétetesn te p our c ontrôler et s tatuer sur l es comptes p ublics, a insi
cqounes s tiutur tc ioenunxa dlietés d aecsc o lordiss, d i netes r tnraaittiéosn a eut xd ep su be lnictsre ;p ­ r i lsae s d'économie m ixte.
­in ltaé r cioenusr td iteusti oj unrnidailcittéio d nus r inèfgélreiemuernets ;
cEollnef ls ittsa td uee e n dernier ressort sur l es arrêts d éfinitifs r endus ; ­ les
cqoumesptéiotenn qcueis l ue i ne tsret e l exsp ri nesstsitéumtioennst d d éev lo'Élutaet p ; a­ r e lxaa l moi.in een ttoreu t le'É atautt re et l es
lReés gR ioéngsio, ne st .e ntre
ALret icC leo n4 s2e i (l2 c)o nstitutionnel p eut ê tre s aisi par le P résident d e la
Rdeé p lau bC lioquure s, ul ep rP êrmései de et nl et sd ec h l'aAmssberemsb qléuei l n aa c toiomnaploes, el en tP , lreéss i cdoenndt i tions de
stiaeirssi nd ee sd u s é Snéanteaut r, s le. L t ieesr s p dréessi d meenmts bd reess e dxeé lc'Austisfse mr ébgliéoen an uaxti o nale o u le
dpee ul evuernst r s éagisioirn l se s C oonnt s eenil j ceoun. s (2ti)tu L ti'oorngnaenl ic shaatioqnu,e l ef o f ios nq cutieo n lense imnteénrêt,t s la
cjuormidpicotisointios n ju e dti cl eiasi ra etstr i,butions des c ours d 'appel et d es
37
37


(e t3 l)e L se asc lcooisrd a si ni nsti eq runea tl ieosn at ruaxit ér esl a tifs a ux élections
êrétrgeio d néafléersé se t a mu u Cnoicnispeaille cso pnesutitvuetniotn, na eval p nat rl e luer P prréosmiduelgnat t dioen l ,a
lReé Ppruébsliidqeunet, d e l'Assemblée n ationale, le Président du S énat,
duen l t'i e Arsss deemsb m léeem n barteiosn d aeles, ou rng at ienress da edsm siénnisatrtaetuifrss , l es l itiges ; o u
laeusx P d réisspidoesintitosn dse dse e lx'aélcinuétiafs ( 2r é) gc iio­dneasusxu c so. n ­ fe oxrmaméminee n, t t o ut a utre
elitxigpere q susié l muie enst td évolu par la l oi.
Les délais d e promulgation c essent d e c ourir dès la saisine
du Conseil constitutionnel.
Article 41
Lstaa t cuhearm s burre l e d se c so c mopmtepste psu ebslitc cso, m aipnésti eq nutee s puoru cr ec uoxn td rôelse r e t
peanrtraeppurbislieqsu ep su.b ( li4q)u L ees Ce to nseil c onstitutionnel d onne s on avis
dans l es m atières r elevant de sa compétence.
4A8rt i (c1l)e L e
Cproénssideeiln ctoienllsetsit,u ltéiognisnlealt iv veeisll ee tà r él afé rréegnudlaaririteés . d Iel se n é lep croticolnasm e les
résultats .
(2) Toute contestation r elative à l a régularité de l'une d es
éplreécvtuioenss à l ' article 42 précédent (1) L 'organisation, l e
sfounpcrêtiomnen e emt deenst ,c l haa cmombrpeoss q ituio'enl le et c leosm a ptrterinbdu,t i loenss c d oen dl ait i Conosu rd e
spaairstii n peo ld ituiq Cueo n qsuei ia l c p oanrstitcitiuptéio à n nl 'éelle p catiro tno u dta cnasn ldai d at,
dceircvoannst c eruipxt io oun tc oountec e prenréseo na nines a i qguises al an t p e ronc qéudaulrieté a pplicable
d'agent d u Gouvernement l ors de l 'élection sont f ixées par la loi.
(L3'o) rT goauntiesa c toionnt,e l set af otionnct ir oenlanteivme e àn l ta, lr aé c goumlapriotés id ti'ounn e (2t ) l e s
raéttfréibreuntidounms d peesu tc oê utrres d d é'aféprpéeel a eut dC eosn tsriebiul n coanusxt,i t utionnel.
38
38


p­ o du'evxoairms ip nuebr l liecss .r eI l c eosut rc sh raerlgaétif s: a ux élections
aréug cioonnatelenst iee ut x m duensic éipleacletiso n; s ­ dr é' e gxioanmailnees r e lte m s r uencicoiuprasl e res la; t ­i fd se
dstéaftinuietirv ement s ur l es r ecours contre l es j ugements définitifs
addems jiunrisidtricattiiof n; sA r intifcéleri e 4u9r e; s­ de 'ne xm aamtiiènreer , d seu c r o tonutet n tieux
autre l itige q ui l ui e st e xpressément d évolu par la l oi .
Toutefois, à l a demande du P résident de l a République ,
cpee u dté ê latri e r éduit à 8 ( huit) jours.
La chambre d es comptes e st c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t
statuer s ur l es c omptes p ublics, ainsi q ue s ur c eux des
epnutbreliqpurieses se t parapubliques .
(d1é)c L iseios n s d u Conseil constitutionnel n e s ont p as susceptibles
da'uatpoprietél.s E plluebsl i sq'uimesp,o a sdemnti n ài st otruatteivse l se,s m c ioliutarisr e dse e s t c omptes,
ajuindsici iaq iure'às t,o utes l es p ersonnes physiques et
emxoprraelsessé. m Elelenst d stéavtouleunet p s aurr lt ao u lotei. a utre q uestion q ui l ui est
(2) Une disposition d éclarée inconstitutionnelle
el’anr v tieclretu 4 d2e n e peut ê tre ni promulguée n i mise e n œ uvre.
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t l es
adtetr il bau Ctioounrs s uprême et des chambres q u'elle c omprend,
laepsp cliocnadbilteio d nesv daen t s eauisxi n seo n dte f i cxeélsle p­cair a lain s loi iq . u( 1e) l L ae p C roocnésdeuilr e
dcoénsisgtnituétsio pnonuerl u e ns t m c aonmdpaot sé év e dnet uo enlzleem (1e1n)t mr eenmoubvreesla ble d e six
(6) a ns.
d(2e)s L c'oorugrasn d is'aaptipoenl, e l et d foensc mtioangnisetmraetsn ts , ol an tc doem npaotsuirtieo n à e t les fonctions
sreonnfto crcheoris lias c p oamrmpié dteensc pee d rseosn junraidlitiéctsio d nes . r eC neosm m meémeb p rreosf e ssionnelle é tablie.
39
39


pdoouivveonirt s ê p trueb dli'cusn.e I l h daouitt e: I i lnst é grité m orale et a voir f ait la
dpere c uovnet ed net i leeuuxr c ompétence. ­ examine les r ecours en m atière
déelesc t ions régionales e t municipales ; ( 2) L es membres du
PCroénssideeil n cto dnes t liatu Rtioénpnuebll is qounet. n I los m somnét sd ép sairg l neé s comme suit :
r­e sctoauturse n cto e nntr e d e lerns ied ré c reissisoonrst r s eunr dl euse s p ar les j uridictions
imnfaétrièieruer d ees e conn tentieux a dministratif ; ­ t rois , d ont le P résident
pdaur C leo nP sreéisl,i d ent de la
Rnaétpiounbalilqeu ­e e ;x ­ a t mroinise p, a arp lreè s P a révsisid d eun tB duer el 'aAus s; e­ mt robilsé e p a r le
PSréénsaidt e anptr è dsu a vis d u Bureau ; ­ d eux par
le C onseil supérieur d e la magistrature.
La chambre d es comptes e st c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t
estnattrueeprr i ssuers l p eus bc loiqmuepste est p puabrlaicpsu,b aliiqnusei q s.u O e u sturre c leesu xo n dzees m embres
Pprréévsuidse cnit­sd e dses luas R, l éepsu a bnlicqiueen ss o nt d e d roit : m embres du C onseil
constitutionnel à v ie.
Edenr nc aiesr dr e'ésgsaolritté s u dre sl e vso j uixg, e lem P ernétss id deénfint id tiufs C reonndseuisl cp oanr sl etistu c tioounrnse dl es tsa c tuoem e pnte s
dinufé P rireéusriedse n; t l a d uv oC ixo n seil constitutionnel e st p répondérante.
(d3e) tE onu t cea asu dtree dc éacuèsse o du'i n dcea dpéamcitiéss o ioun d d'e'umnp mêcehmebmree n otu
dpûamr leens t o crognasnteasté c eo mpétents prévus à l 'article 42 p ar la l oi, s on
remplaçant est d ésigné p ar l'autorité ou l 'organe compétent
cnoonmcmerén.é ( 1e )t L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition
echt a lems b artetrsib quutiio l nas c doem lpao Cseonutr, s leusp rc êomndei t eiot n dse sd e saisine de c elle
­p r coi,c léedsu mreo adpaplitléicsa b dlee sd ae v saanisti ne eu,x a , i snosni tq f uixeé l eas par l a loi.
Réunion du Parlement au Congrès.
((52)) L L e'osr gf oanncistaiotniosn d, el e m foenmctbioren n deum C eonnt,s l eai l c coomnsptoitsuittiioonnn e etl l es
sfoonnct ti inocnosm dpeas t ciboleusrs a dv'eacp pc eell l eets d due C m oenmsebirl e judiciaire
40
40


p­ o du'evxoairms ip nuebr l liecss . r e Il c eosut rc sh r aerlgaétif s: aux é lections régionales e t
mreulantiicfsip aaule sst a; t­ u d t 'd eexsa mm ienmerb lreess ,r en cootaumrsm reelnatt ifl es sa oubx lil gitiagteiosn ;s , ­
ddéef is ntiatitvueemr ent s ur les recours contre l es jugements r endus par
aledsm juinriidsticratitoifn ;s A inrtfiécrleie 5 u2re Us n een l m oia f tixièer el ' od reg ac noinstaetniotnie ue xt l e
fonctionnement du Conseil constitutionnel, ­ d'examiner,
tloituigte a quutrie l u i e st
expressément d évolu p ar l a loi. ­ d'examiner, t out
aleust r ceo lnitdigiteio q nusi d luei se as ts e axispirnees sa éinmsei q nut ed é lav op luro pcaérd ul ar e lo a i.p plicable
devant l ui.
Article 4 1
TchITaRmEb r VeI I dI eL sa c omptes est c ompétente pour contrôler et
setnattrueeprr i ssuers l ep su bc loiqmupetse s e t p ublics, a insi q ue sur ceux des
parapubliques .
5A3rt i­ c s leta tue
perne d meièrnreie r in r setsasnocret .s (u1r) lL eas j Huaguetme e Cnotsu rd d éefin j uitisfsti cr ee n edsut s c o emn p étente
dpeosu r a c cotensn a cîotrmem is dans l 'exercice d e s es fonctions : ­
eaxuatrmesin q eur e tosutiotenss qui lui s ont e xpressément d évolues par
l­a L l eo i P. résident de la R épublique pour haute trahison ; ­ Le
Premier m inistre, les membres d u g ouvernement e t l es
aasinssimi q iluées l es h auts f onctionnaires auxquels d es pouvoirs
odnets éa ttétr d ibéulétiognusé s d ee n la v C erotuu rd seusp a rêrtmicele se t 1 d 0e e st c 1 h2a mc i­bdreesss quusi, l a
csoumprpêomsee n pto, u dre cso c mopnldoitt ioc onns t dree l s aa sisûirneeté d d ee l a l ' E Ctoaut.r
l(a2 )p Lroec P édréusried ea nptp dlicea lbal eR éd peuvabnliqt u eeu xe se ts m t f iisx ée en pa acrc l uas laotii.o ( n2 )e t
lLa'o crogmanpiosasittiioonn, el et l feosn ca ttitornibnuetimonesn td , e s c ours d'appel e t
iddeesn tj uiqruideic àti ob nusll e jutidni co iuavireerst s e ot nà t ld aé mtearjmorinitéé sd peas rq u una tv roet e ci n quièmes
de l eurs m embres.
41
41


(P3r)é L seidse anct t dees l cao Rmémpiusb p liaqru lee s ont c ouverts par l'immunité et il n 'est
lpeass r er ecsopuorsn s caobnlter e d el ess c d oénctiessiotantsio r nesn d; u­ e ssta ptuaer l deésf ij nuirtiidveicmtioennst s ur
iennfé m rieautirèerse d e contentieux a dministratif ; (4) L ' o rganisation , l a
acoffmairpeoss i stioonnt e s to l uems ic soensd a itiinosni sq duaen l as l p ersoqcuéedlulerse l es
applicable d evant l a Cour d e ­ statue définitivement sur
tqouui s lu a i u storenst e l ixtipgreess sément d évolus p ar l a l oi.
La destitution est prévue par la loi
ATrITticRleE 4 IX1 Le
dCeosn csoemil Epcteosn e osmt i cqoume p eét tS eoncteia p l Loau rc c hoanmtrbôrleer et s tatuer sur l es
comptes publics, a insi q ue s ur ceux des entreprises p ubliques e t
pAarrtiacpleu b5 l4iques.
mIl e isssti oi nns :t it ué u n Conseil é conomique e t s ocial. Il a p our
­p ad re l e stsa j tuureidr i ecntio dnesr ni niefér r rieesusreosrt d seusr lc eosm j upgteesm ;e ­n d ts'e dxéafminiintiefsr r t oeuntdeuss
qauuetr el as l q oui e lusit ia otntrsib ue
expressément.
Collectivités territoriales r égionales e t
locales
AArrttiiccllee 4 525 (1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a c omposition
eqtu l'eelsle a (t1tr)ib Luetiso n cos lld eec t liav i Ctéosu t re srruitporrêiamlees e rté d geiosn cahleasm e bt r leosc a les
ldees lc ao R nséepiulsb.l i Tqouuet ec oa mutprree anunteonrtit é le s d er é c geio tnyps e e te st créée par l a
lcooi.l leT cotuivteité a e ustrte c c réoélleec p tiavrit é la e losit. c réée par l a l oi. Toute autre
( 2 ) Les collectivités régionales et locales s ont
djoeusis p seernsto dnen el 'as um toonroamlesie d a ed d mrioniits ptruabtilvice. eE tl l es
friéngainocniaèurex d eat n losc laau gxe. s Etliloens d seosn t i n litbérreêst s d e
42
42


caodlmleicntiisvtirtéése p p uabr l diqeuse cso. nE slleei le ss ét l:u s d ans les c onditions fixées par l a loi.
­r e elaxatifms ia nuex l ec so n retecnotuiersu x é lectoraux régionaux et m unicipaux ; Les
ccoolnlescetiilvsi t déess r é gionales e t l ocales o nt p our mission de favoriser
cleu l dtuérveel lo ept ps peomretifn d t eé c coenso cmoilqleucet,iv s itoécsi.a ­ l, s staantuiteanirte e , n é d duecrnaiteifr, ressort sur les
reenc om uarsti è croen d tree c leosn t deénctiiesiuoxn sa dr emnindiusetrsa tp ifa ;r ( l3e)s L ju'Éritdaitc e tioxenrsc ien fu énri e puoruevso ir de
ctuotlelellcet i svuitré s le rsé gionales e t
ldoacnasle l se,s conditions f ixées par la loi. ­ e xamine, tout a utre litige q ui l ui est
expressément d évolu par la l oi.
(4) L 'Etat a ssure le d éveloppement h armonieux de
ld'eenss ceomllbelcet i vités t erritoriales d écentralisées . Article 4 1 La chambre des
cpoumblpictse,s a einsst i c q oumep séuter nc teeu p xo duers c eonnttrreôplerris eets s ptautbuleiqr u seusr e lets p caorampputbelsiq ues, en
dfoensc p tioonte dnetia lalit és so lr idéagrioitén a nleasti oe nt ad lee, l ' équilibre interrégional.
(5) L 'organisation, l e f onctionnement e t l e r èglement financier d es
tceorlrlietocrtiivailteéss s ont définis par la l oi. Elle s tatue e n d ernier ressort sur l es
jruegnedmuse n ptasr d leésfi n juitriifdsi c tions inférieures d es comptes ; (6) L e règlement
icnoténrsieeiulsr d eests d éfini par la loi. E lle examine toutes autres questions q ui l ui
sdoénvto eluxepsr e psasré l ma e loni.t
Article 5 6
ALr'Etictalet t 4 ra2n (s1f)è re aux Régions, dans les c onditions fixées par l a
lfooin, cl etiso n cnoemmpeéntet,n lcae c so d mapnoss lietiso n d oe mt l aeisn e astt r (i b1u) tL io'onrsg d aen is laa t Cioonu,r l es u prême et
daeinss i c q huaem l bar e psro q cué'edlulere c a opmppliocrateb,le le d se cvoanndt i etilolenss s doen st af iixséinees par l a
leoti .l e( 2s ) R L éag liooin d sé dfiannits : l ­e l se dp oamrtaaignee s d e dse c coommppéétteennccees a e innstrie t r la'Entsafté rés.
(2) L 'organisation, l e f onctionnement, la composition et les attributions
(d3e)s L C eso ur erss s do'auprpceesl e d te d se Rs é jugriiodnicst.i o (n4s) L jued fiocinacirieers ,e t les biens
de chaque r égion.
43
43


AProtiucvleo i5 rs7 p ublics. I l est c hargé : (1)
LCeosn so ergila rnéegsio d nea l l.a ­ Re xéagmioinn e snotn lte l se r C eoconusersil r r eélgaitoifnsa a l ue xt l é el eP crtéiosnidse r nétg dioun ales
seut rm l eusn i cipales e t le Conseil régional . litiges ; ­ statuent e n dernier r essort
trreibcuonuarsu x c o innftéreri el eusr sd d éacinssio lness d a éfffainirietisv er se l reevnadnut ed se sp a cro l mesp é tences
transférées à l a Région par l ' État administratif .
( 2) L e
Cleosn a suetirle rsé gl itioigneasl q eusti l l u' oi r sgoannt ee x dpérleibsésréamnte d net d laé vR oélugsio .n L. e Ils e c xoanmsieniell et orsu s
Arérgtiicolen a 4u1x ­ d doenst l a durée d u mandat e st d e 5 ( cinq) a ns c omprennent :
délégués départementaux é lus a u suffrage u niversel i ndirect ;
La chambre d es c omptes est c ompétente pour c ontrôler et e xercer s on
pauubtolirqituée ssu er tl e psa rc aopmupbtlieqsu e psu.b ­li cl ess, ar einpsrié q sueen t saunrt s c e duexs dc hees fe s n trtraedpitriiosnense ls élus
par l eurs pairs.
Français L e Conseil régional reflète l es d ifférentes composantes
ssoucr i loelso gj uiqgueemse d nets l a d é Rféingitiiofsn . r e Iln sdtautsu p ea e rn l e dse j runriiedri cr teiosnsso r itn férieures ; c atégorie,
reèxgplreess dsé'inméelingti b ilité, ­ e xamine toutes a utres q uestions qui lui s ont
dqéuvi o lului seosn pt ae rx l par e losi.s é­ me xeanmt d inéev o toluuetess p a aur tl rae sl o q i.u Iel ss ttiaotnuse en d ernier
rinecsosmorpt as tuibr il leitsé s e t les
émoluments d es c onseillers régionaux sont f ixés par l a l oi.
(fo3n) cL teio C nnoenmseeiln rté, glaio cnoaml p eosts d itiioring ée tp laers u f no n( c1t)i o Ln'osr g daen lias aR tiéogni,o lne d e l a C our
sduep lraê R méeg e iot nd ea sin cshi aq mueb rl ae s p rq ouc'iél d cuorme pa rpepnldic, a lebsle c d oenvdaitniot n esu x d,e l es sa i sine
mdee m la bR reésg ié olnu.s À p o ceu r t il tare d, u ilr ée es td f uix é C op nasr el ail .l o eix. ée csut t li'fin terlocuteur d u
représentant de l 'État.
(2) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, la c omposition e t l es attributions des
BCuoruerasu d r 'aépgpioenl ae lt é dleus à j u 4r4idictions judiciaires, I l e st a ssisté d'un
44


amuêtomreité tse m pupbsl iq quuee s lu. i I­lm eêsmt c eh p aargrmé i: l eens membres d u Conseil. Le Bureau
réélegciotonraal l r reéfglèioten al el s e ­ t m e xuanmiciinpea l l e; sc o remcpoousrsa nr etelast i sfso c aiuo lo cogniqtueensti ed uex la
Rstéagtuioen e. n­ dernier ressort sur les r ecours c ontre l es
jmugaetimèreen d tse d céofninteitniftsie ruexn da udsm pinairs tl erast ij fu ;r i( d4i)c t Lioenss d iénpféurtiéesu rd ees le an R égion siègent
daéul éC gounés, e nilo rmégmioén p aal r a l vee P c r véosiixd ec notn d suul t ­a etixvaem. A inretic tloeu 5 t 8a u (1tr)e U linti g e qui
lui est expressément
ldaé l vooi.lu par
Article 41 L a République représente l'État d ans l a R égion. À ce t itre, il
est chargé d es i ntérêts n ationaux, d u contrôle administratif, du
rleosisp eetc t r èd gelse m ents, a insi q ue d u maintien d e l' o rdre. La Chambre des
cl'aoumtoprtietés d e est la co C mopuér td eenste c eonm mptaetsiè, rs eu dr el e cso cnotmrôplete est p d u'obrldicres,. a Il ins tsai tq uuee, s ous
sur ceux des entreprises publiques et p arapubliques.
(2) I l exerce le p ouvoir d e tutelle d es c ours d es c omptes ; ­ statue en
Idl e droniite :r ressort s ur les j ugements
deéxafinmitiinfse r t eonudteuss a puatrr el ess m c aotuièrsre d se q su ceo l ma pl otei s lu d i e d é l'l è Égtuaet s e uxrp l rae R sséégmioenn .t . ­
(1) L e C onseil régional peut ê tre s uspendu p ar l e P résident de la
Rloérspquubeli q cueet o rgane : ­ m ène d es activités contraires à la
lCeos na stttirtiubtuiotino n; s( 1d )e L l'ao rC gaonuirs sautipornê, ml ee f oe nt cd teio snense mc heanmt, bl are c so ­m ppoortseitniot na te tet i nte
àl'i n laté s gérictéu r tietér rd iteo r li'aÉltea td oeu l' É àt al 'ot r;d ­ r ec op mubploicrt e; n­ t p, ol ertse n cot na dttietiionntes à d e saisine d e
qceulele lsa­ c pir aoicnésdi u re applicable d evant e lles s ont fixées p ar l a loi.
Les autres cas de suspension s ont prévus p ar la l oi.
(2) L 'organisation, le f onctionnement, la c omposition e t l es attributions
dCeosn sC eoilu rrésg dio'anpapl ep le e utt d ê etrse j ud riisdsicotuiosn psa j ru l dei cP iaréirseisd,e (n2t) d L ee l a R épublique,
après consultation du 45
45


pLueb C liqounesse.i l I cl o ensts tc ithuatirognén :e ­l d d 'aenxsa m toiunse r le s cas prévus pour les collectivités
lreésg ir oencaoluerss e etn m muantiicèiprea ld e'sé.l e Lcetsio anus t res cas de dissolution s ont r églés par
la loi.
(3) L e r emplacement d' office d udit organe par des
cjuognetemnetinetusx r a ednmduinsi s ptarar t lief s d ej u lr'iEdticatti o dnasn s in l feésri e cuarse p sr e énvu ms aa tuièxr e d e
a­ ls intaétause ( e1n) ed te (r2n)ie cri ­ dessus est décidé par le P résident d e la R épublique.
creasss p orrét v suusr l es r ecours contre les décisions d éfinitives de l'Etat d ans l es
a(2u)x c ai­ldineésassu s (1. )c o ent t entieux administratif de l'Etat. ­ e xamine, tous
mauotdreasli tl éitsig es qui l ui i ncombent e xpressément p ar la l oi. ( 4) L es
d'application du présent a rticle l ui i ncombent par l a l oi. s ont d éterminées p ar la loi.
Article 4 1
Article 6 0 La
chambre d es comptes est c ompétente p our contrôler e t statuer s ur les
sceommip­pteusb lp iquubelisc.s ,( 1 a)i nL sei q Purées s iduer nc te eutx l e d eB su erenatrue p druis Ceos n psuebill i rqéugeios ne at l peuvent
être suspendus p ar le P résident du Conseil .
Rméispsuiobnliq :u e où ces organes : Elle a pour
­d ed ren miere n reesrs d oerts s aucrt il veisté jsu gc eomnteranitrse sd éà f i lnai tC ifso nr esntidtuutsio pna ;r ­ l ed se c sotautruse dr e e n ju stice
­in d fé'erxieaumreinse ;r ­ d e porter atteinte à l a s ûreté de l'État ou de droit p ublic ;
tqouuetest i aount r qeu i lui e st e xpressément d évolue par l a loi ; ­ d e mettre e n
danger l 'intégrité territoriale d e l'État.
Les autres c as de suspension sont p révus par la loi.
Article 4 2 (2)
Lfoen P ctriéosnindeemnte entt ,l e la B c uormeapuo sd iuti o Cno e nts l eeisl r féognicotnioanl s ( 1 d)e L l'ao rC gaonuirs sautipornê, ml ee et
ddaens sc ht oaums b leress c q aus' i pl rc éovmups r àe n l'da,li n leésa c ( o1n) dc iit­idoensss dues s saoinstin f eix éd eus C poanrs l eai l
loi.
Lfoensc atiountrneesm c aesn t d, e la l ic coemncpioesmiteionnt s e ot nl at rl oéig.lés par ( 2) L'organisation, l e
devoirs d es cours d 'appel et d es juridictions judiciaires,
46
46


(d3u)d L ite o rregmanpela p ceamr l e'Éntta dt e d a pnlesi nl e ds rc oaits p révus a ux a linéas (1) e t ( 2) c i­
rdeessssourst se usrt l deésc r iedcéo puarsr l feo rP mrééssi dc eonntt rd ee l e las R juégpeumbelinqtuse d . é ­ f sintaittiufse r eenn d duesr n piaerr
ljeusri d ictions inférieures d ans l es c as de litiges a dministratifs ; ( 4) L es
md'aopdpalliictéasti o n d u présent article sont déterminées p ar la l oi. ­
setxapturees esné md eernnti ed ré rveosluso p rat rs ul ar l tooiu. t( 1a )u L trees l ip tigroev qinucie l us i s e usivt a ntes d eviennent
des R égions :
­ Adamaoua ; ­
ACretinctlere 4 ;1 ­
cEhsat m; Lbare des comptes e st compétente pour c ontrôler e t s tatuer sur l es
acionmsip q teuse p s uubr l cicesu, x des entreprises publiques et d 'économie mixte. ­
NExotrrdê m; Lei­ttoral ;
E­ Nlleo re ds.t
Ochuaersgté ;e ­ : d ­e N s otardtu­er en dernier ressort sur l es jugements définitifs r endus
cpoaur rl se s d e s
icnofémrpietuerse s ; ­ S ud ; ­ d 'examiner t outes autres matières q ui l ui sont
deéxvporelusessé m paern l ta l oi .
(2) L e P résident de la R épublique peut, d ans l a m esure o ù l'article 4 2 le
requiert :
aé)n u mmoédriféieers l ea su n poamrasg re at pl ehse l ( im1)i tc eis­d geésosugsra ;p ( h1i)q u Le'osr gd aensi sr aétgioionn, sl e
froéngciotinosn né enmumenétr,é leas c aoum ppaorsaitgioranp ehte le ( s1 ) l im ci­idteess s guéso g croamphpirqeunense nd te l se s
dcoen s daitisioinnes d e la C our suprême e t des c hambres qui l ui sont
anpopmlisc a abinlessi q ; ub e) cl ar ép erro cd é'aduutrree s a rpépgliicoanbsl.e D d aenvsa nc et e c laless, e i l t l ef iuxre d l eounrnse l id meiste s
géographiques. s ont fixées par l a loi.
(2) L 'organisation, le f onctionnement, la c omposition e t l es attributions
dde'asp cpoeul r est des j uridictions judiciaires,
47
47

. ,

leur d onner d es noms e t fixer l eurs l imites géographiques.
AProtiucvleo i 6rs2 p: u blics. Il est c hargé
dlees :r e( 1c)o L uerss rr eèlgalteifss e a tu rxè l gitliegmese n étlse c stuosramuexn r téiognionnéasu :x ­ e etx aminer
­m su’anpicpipliqauuex r; à toutes les r égions .
d­ és ctaistuioenrs d dééfifninitiitviveemse (n2t) sS uar n less p rreécjuoduircse c doenstr d ei s lepso s itions d e la
pinréfésreienutere p sa drtaien,s l el ess j u agffeamireesn dtse r ed nrodiut ps ep uavre lenst pj urerinddicrteio enns
ccoonnsciedrénrea tl ieounr l es spécificités d e certaines Régions en ce q ui
eotr gl eaunri s ation
fonctionnement. ­ examiner, tout autre l itige qui lui est
deéxpvorelus s péamr e lan lto i.
Révision d e la Constitution A rticle 41
Article 63
Ldae s c hc aommbprtee s e st c ompétente p our contrôler e t s tatuer s ur l es
cdo'émcopnteosm p ieu bm licixst ea .i n( 1s)i q Duees s ruérv ic seiounxs d d ees le an Ctroenpsritsiteusti o pnu b pleiquuveesn te ê t t re
lpar oR péopsuébelsiq s uoei,t s p oairt p lea Pr lreé s Pidaerlnetm d een t.
(2) Elle
dpoairt l :e ­ s sj utartiduiecrt id oénfsin initifvéerimeuernets s d uer sl e c so j mugpetemse ;n ­t s e x daémfininiteifsr t roeuntdeu s
qauuit rl eu i q euset se tixopnr e ssément d évolue p ar la loi.
(3) Le Parlement s e réunit e n congrès lorsqu'il e st appelé à
examiner un projet o u u ne p roposition d 'amendement. L'
aàm l ' e anrdticelme e4 n2t e st a dopté à l a majorité absolue des m embres du
Pdeaurlxeimèmenet .l eL cetu P reré ;s d idaennst l daeq ul ae l Rleé cpoumblpiqrueen dp ,e leust d c eomndaintidoenrs u dnee
ereunxv .o ( i 4 d)e L vea nP tr e éusixd ea nints di e q ul ae Rl aé ppruobcliéqduuer ep ea uptp d liécacibdleer d d eev a nt
usonu rméfeétrteren dt ouumt p ; rd oajents d c ee l o cai vsi,s l a'anmt à e n mdoedmifeienrt l e as Ct aodnosptittuét ià o n la à
Lm'oarjograitnéis s aimtiopnle, l e d e fos n scutfiofrnangeems ee nxpt,r l iam céosm. (p 2o)s ition e t l es a ttributions
dloei.s cours d'appel e t des cours judiciaires, e st fixée p ar la
Article 64
48
48

­

référendum ; d ans ce cas, l 'amendement s era a dopté à la
majorité s imple d es suffrages exprimés.
Aportuicvleo ir 6s4 p ublics. I l doit :
Aucune p rocédure de révision d e l a Constitution ­ examiner les
Areuccouunres p rerolactéifsd ua ruex d éel e rcétvioisniosn r éd gei ol an a Cleosn se tti t mutuionnic 4 ip8ales
portant atteinte à l a forme r épublicaine, à l 'unité e t aux conflits t erritoriaux ;
paottretianntet à l a forme r épublicaine, à l 'unité et à l 'intégrité territoriale d e l'État
et a ux p rincipes d émocratiques ­ statue en dernier r essort s ur les recours
dcoénmtroec rl 'aintitqéugeristé q t ueir rréitogrisiasleen d t el a l 'R Étéapt ue bt li lqeus ep r sionncitp a ecsc eptés. q ui r égissent la
République s ont a cceptés. les j ugements rendus par l es tribunaux
sinpféécriieaulerss D e nis pc aoss it dioen l sit ig speés ca iadlmesin ­ i s etrxaatmifsin ;e P t AoRusT Ia Eu t XreIIs D liitsigpeoss iq tiuoin l su i
sont e xpressément
dévolus p ar l a
loi.
Article 6 5
Article 6 5
CL A eort ni p csr letéit au 4 mt1io b L nu e.l e p r f a é i a t m pa b r u ti l e e i f n a t i é t g p r a a r n tie te i n d t e é g l a r a p n r t é e s e d n e t e la
présente C onstitution.
LCao n cshtaitmutbioren .d es comptes e st c ompétente p our c ontrôler e t
statuer s ur l es c omptes p ublics, ainsi q ue s ur c eux des
entreprises
peut bp laiqruaepsu b liques .
lF merse a
m
n ç
b
a
r
i
e
s
s
L
d
e
u
P
G
ré
o
s
u
i
v
d
e
e
r
n
n
t
e
d
m
e
e
la
n t
R
e
é
t
p
a
u
s
b
si
l
m
iqu
ilé
e
s
,
,
l e
l e
P
P
re
ré
m
s
i
i
e
d
r
e
m
nt
i n
e
i
t
s
l
t
e
re
s
,
membres du Bureau des cours des comptes ; le Président
Petr él essid menetm ebt rl eess d m ue Bmubrreeasu d due B l 'u Aresasue m deb ll é'Aes n saetmiobnlaélee , le
nationale, l e Président et les m embres d u Bureau d u S énat, les
mPaermlebmreesn td , us t atuent e n dernier r essort s ur les j ugements définitifs
rendus. Il examine t outes a utres questions que la loi lui
ddééplèugtéuse, e l exsp rs eésnsaétmeuernst,. t F oruasn l çeasi st it leu la biureresa d u' u dnue S foénncatti,o lne s
élective, les s ecrétaires­sénateurs, t ous l es t itulaires d 'une
fleosn cs teiocnré étaleircetisv e g,é néraux des ministères e t a ssimilés, A rticle
42 g énéraux des ministères e t assimilés, l es d irecteurs de
l'administration c entrale, l es d irecteurs généraux d es entreprises
cp leeu snb ta lri t qatr uleib e, u s t e io t n p s a d ra e p l u a b C liq o u u e r s s , u l p e r s ê d m ir e e c e t t e d u e rs s d e e s c l 'a h d a m m i b n r i e st s r , a l t e io s n
directeurs d 'entreprises p ubliques e t parapubliques, l es
fmisacgailset,r ad tus , r e lecso up verresmonennet ls e t a ddum t irnaiistetrmateifns t c dheasr g méas gd iset rl 'aatsss, i ette
les personnels administratifs c hargés d e l 'assiette f iscale,
tdouu sr e l ceosu gveresmtioennnta e irte dsu d terasi t cermédeintst d p eusb l ficosn de st s pounbtl if cixsé, s p ar
la loi. (2) L'organisation, l e fonctionnement, l a composition e t l e
spoantrti mt eoniunse dd ee s d é Ccolaurres rd l 'eauprpse b l i eetn dse est j lueruidrsic b tioiennss ju adui cd iéabiruets e, t à
la f in de l eurs f onctions .
Les autres catégories d e personnes auxquelles
s'appliquent l es d ispositions du p résent article e t les ...
49 49
49


FErllaen e çsati s c h daersg p éoeu :v ­ o d ir'se xp aumbliinces.r les r ecours en matière
dréeg cioonnatel n etti e muuxn é icleipcatol r; a­ l d e statuer e n d ernier ressort s ur les
recours
PfoArmRéTsIE c oX nIItIre les j ugements définitifs rendus p ar
cleosn tj eunritdieicutxio a nds m inifnéisriterautrief s; A enrt im clea t 6iè7r e­ d d'ee x aminer t out
autre litige qui l ui
eexspt r essément
dpérévvoulue s( 1 p)a Lre las n looi.u pvaerll e las pi nrésstiteuntitoen Cs o dnes tl aitu Rtiéopnu s bolniqtu m e is es en
pplraocgere ssivement.
A(2rt)i cP lee n 4d1a nt la période d e mise e n p lace des institutions e t
ejuxsisqtua'àn t leesu rd e m liase R eénp u pblalicqeu,e l e dse imnsetuitruetniotn esn p lace et s tatuent
psuurb ll ieqsu e cos me tp pteasr ap puubblilciqsu aeisn.si que sur c eux des entreprises
FErllaen a ç ap iso u r a ttributions : a ) L e Président de l a République
emna e nxdeartc eicne c doeumrse, u­ rd ee e snt a fotunecrt i eonn d j uesrqnuie'àr r l ae s fisno drte s s uor nl e s
jduégfeinmitiefsn tr se n dus par les j uridictions inférieures des comptes,
sdoisupso r séitsioenrvse d dee l 'a l'artpicplelic 6 a t( i4o)n d d ee sl a présente C onstitution ;
a­ ud t'erex a qmueinsetiro tno uq tuei l ui e st expressément d évolue par l a
loi. b) Les d éputés à l 'Assemblée nationale demeurent en
fjounsqctuio'àn la fin d e leur mandat en c ours, s ous réserve de
l('1a)p pL l'oicragtaionnis d aetiso n d,i sl ep o fosnitciotinosn nd eem l 'aerntitc, ll ea 8 c o (1m2p) o csi­idtioenss e uts l .e
dpeo ul av o Ciro l uérg s isulaptriêf me te j o eut is dseesn ct h daem t oburetess p laersle p mréernotgaairteivse s
jnuastqioun'àa l lea e mxiesrec e e nl a p plalécnei td uud eS é dneas t a. t( t3ri)b L u'tAiosnsse md eb l léae C our
spuropcrêémduer ee t a dpepsli cc ahbalem d berevsa,n a t i enlslei sq ,u s eo lnat f ixés p ar la loi.
(4) L a C our suprême exerce l es a ttributions d u C onseil
c(2o)n L s'toitrugtaionnisnaetli oj uns,q l eu 'à fo l nac mtioisnen ee mn ep nlat,c l ea d ceo mc ep o dseirtnioienr e .t l es
ajutdtriicbiuatiiroenss, ( d5e) s L C'oorguarsn id sa'atpiopne lt ee rtr i dtoersia jluer id deic tl 'iEontast demeure
inchangée jusqu'à l a création des Régions.
50
50


La(6ou)rt os Lqroiutrésesq lue pe u S b léelin q Sauéte n esas. ttI l em dsiots i m te :ni s( 6 p e )l na c pela a cvea anvt al ent l es régions, l e
céaoluelxlcè t égolerea c él tl pieoocnutsor r r laé'élg lp eioocnutiaor lnl e'é s dl ee ecst t m i ­o enux nd aicemispi an réleegnsito lness, rl eec cooullrèsg r ee l atifs
mdLeeu sn i scéipnaautexu. rL se s so snét n eaxtceluurssiv seomnet n etx cc loumsipvoesméesn dt ec o cmonpsoesiélles r s
Cc­ os ontasn teu sielele e irl nsle m d r eus rnn .iiceirp r aeusxs.ort sur l es recours formés
icAnofréntirctireleeu l 2 ree s:s L j u daga p enrmsé leseensnt s at ef df aé loifriie n ssiet ifd rsae r e ec nonrndetugesins pttireaéure x l,e p asud jbumlriiiéndeiisc ts trieoalntoisfn ; l a
pfprrraoonccçééaddiusu.rr ee A d r t'iucrleg e 2n :c L ea e p t ri nésséernétee a loui s Jeoruar ne anlr o efgfiicsiterél ee ,n p aunbgliléaeis s e etl o enn l a
eldat' u i g nrgaseézneréctetee a ouf fJ icoiuerlnlea l e onf f aicniegl lae nis ae ntg elani s f re atn eçna i fsra.nçais.
­ e xaminer, tout autre litige d évolu expressément
ALlu'rai t ire ctsilce tl es 6 o 86 u 8 m is par la loi.
LÉata ltésg fiésldaétiroéns a àp l pal id caatbele d d ' e anntsr él 'eÉ te ant f véigduéeraulr d d ue C l aa m preérsoeunnt ee tC d oannssti t luetsio n
demeure en vigueur. Article 4 1
Ll'ean ctrhéaem ebnr e v i dgeuse uc ro md ep t lae s p e résst ec notme pC éotennstteitu p tioounr r ceosntetrrôale ern e vt i gueur
ccàoe c nuetxrt atd eien r dèl arge l C e d oas nunsrst il t leaus t m ioc onem,s ue prtt eet a so n ùp t uq ebullel'iec nlsle',e an sit'ne pssait s q p ua ceos ns mturoar di riefi é e par l a
Crèognlesmtituetniotsn ,u e ltét r taienutr qs u.'elle n 'est p as modifiée par l es lois e t
Elle s tatue
en dernier r essort sur l es j ugements définitifs rendus p ar l es juridictions i nférieures.
AAtrrritbtiiccullneea 6 6 u99x l deess
cpaoruémtrsepe tn qetusee ; ls oL tiia os np e rrq éaus e ie nl nurtie e eg s liost it e r séxeepr rae e te s psnuérebmglieiésnettr éa d eué v e ­ ote l puxuaebmliiénee ra tuo u Ltae
JsJuooruu errnnlleaa llp o o affrff ii lccaii ee loll i d d.ee l laa R Rééppuubblliiqquuee d duu C Caammeerroouunn e enn
Aetn l gel aF isra e ntç Farisa n eçt a misi s e et n m œis u evnr eœ cuovmrem c eo ml ' Amreti cl 'lAe n4 g2la is
dCCeoo nn lass tt iittuuttiioonn d d ee l laa R Rééppuubblliiqquuee d duu C Caammeerroouunn..
(1) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, la composition e t
Y1su4ap o aruvênrmidl ée 2, 0 el 0et 8 d 1 e A4s ta t crvihbraiul mt 2io0bn0rse8 s d Y e qa ul oa'eu C lnledo éuL ,re l e P r ésident de la
RMcoéompnupsbireeliuqnrud l e el e, Psr c éosniddeintiot nd se d lae R s éapisuinbelique,
((SSiiggnnéé)) P P AAUULL B B IIYYAA
leur exercice ainsi q ue la procédure a pplicable d evant e ux sont fixés
par l a loi.
(2) L 'organisation, l e fonctionnement, la composition e t
devoirs d es c ours d 'appel et d es j uridictions judiciaires,
5511
51



=== CM_Code_Penal_CamerounEN.pdf ===


Official Journal o f the R epublic o f C ameroon
CODE PENAL
n° 6 7/LF/1
June 1 2, 1967
BOOK O NE
CRIMINAL LAW
FIRST T ITLE
ON THE APPLICATION OF C RIMINAL L AW
CHAPTER ONE
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
Article 1 — N o exemptions.
Criminal l aw a pplies to e veryone.
Article 2 — G eneral a nd s pecial application.
(1) The r ules o f i nternational law a nd duly promulgated and published t reaties shall a pply to t his Code
and to a ny penal p rovision.
(2) (Law N o. 6 7-LF-1 of June 12, 1 967): This b ook prevails over a ny other c riminal p rovision e xcept f or
special p rovisions a imed i n particular at prohibiting s uspended sentences a nd prohibiting or l imiting mitigating
circumstances enacted e ven before t he entry i nto force of t his book, b y a l aw o r by a r egulatory text having
legislative effect. T his paragraph i s r etroactive to O ctober 1 , 1 966 i nclusive.
(3) Where t he same m atter is t he subject o f both a g eneral provision n ot included in t his book and a s pecial
provision, the latter a lone shall apply u nless otherwise provided.
CHAPTER II
ON THE APPLICATION OF C RIMINAL L AW OVER TIME.
Article 3 — N on-retroactivity.
Acts c ommitted p rior to its e ntry into force o r t hose which have not b een j udged before its e xpress or t acit repeal
are n ot subject to criminal l aw.
Article 4 — L ess s tringent law.


(1) Any new a nd l ess s tringent criminal provision a pplies t o offences not f inally j udged o n the d ay of its
entry into force.
(2) If t he n ew p rovision i s more s tringent, o ffences committed b efore its e ntry i nto force continue t o be judged in
accordance with the o ld l aw.
Article 5 — N ew s ecurity measure.
Any law enacting a s ecurity m easure i s applicable t o facts not d efinitively judged on the d ay of its e ntry into
force.
Article 6 — A bolition o f t he offence, penalty or m easure.
Immediately ceases t o r eceive e xecution of any penalty o r security measure:
(a) Pronounced o n t he basis of an a ct which n o l onger c onstitutes an o ffence;
(b) Abolished after conviction.
CHAPTER III
ON THE A PPLICATION O F CRIMINAL L AW I N S PACE.
Article 7 — Offense committed on the t erritory.
(1) The criminal l aw of the R epublic applies t o any act committed o n its t erritory.
(2) The territory of t he R epublic includes the t erritorial w aters and t he a irspace a bove that t erritory a nd i ts w aters,
as well as ships and aircraft r egistered i n the R epublic.
However, no member of the c rew o f a f oreign s hip or aircraft, w ho is the a uthor o f an offence committed
on board t o the d etriment of another member of the c rew, e ven w ithin t erritorial w aters or airspace, may
be tried by the c ourts o f the R epublic unless the a ssistance o f t he l ocal a uthority has been requested or public
order has been c ompromised.
Article 8 — O ffense partially or t otally c ommitted a broad.
The criminal l aw of the R epublic applies:
(a) Any offence o ne of t he c onstituent e lements o f which w as c ommitted i n i ts t erritory;
(b) Offenses a gainst state s ecurity, counterfeiting the s tate s eal or national currencies i n c irculation,
committed e ven a broad.
However, no foreigner m ay be t ried by t he c ourts of the R epublic under paragraph b, unless he has been arrested
on the t erritory of the R epublic or h as been e xtradited.


Article 9 — C omplicity, conspiracy, attempt.
The f ollowing a re s ubject to the c riminal law of the Republic:
(a) A cts constituting complicity, conspiracy and attempt c arried out on the territory o f
the Republic w ith a view t o c ommitting a n offence abroad if this offence is a lso
punishable b y f oreign l aw;
b) T he s ame a cts committed abroad with a v iew t o committing a n o ffence on the
territory o f t he R epublic.
Article 10 — Offense c ommitted a broad by a c itizen o r r esident.
(1) T he criminal l aw o f t he R epublic a pplies to a cts c ommitted abroad by a c itizen o r a r esident,
provided t hat t hey are punishable b y the l aw o f the place w here t hey were committed and are
classified a s crimes or offenses by the l aws o f t he Republic.
However, the p enalty i ncurred cannot be g reater than t hat p rovided f or by f oreign law.
(2) N o c itizen o r resident g uilty of a n offence committed against a p rivate i ndividual may,
however, be tried b y the c ourts of t he R epublic u nder this article except o n the prosecution of
the public prosecutor s eized of a complaint o r an official denunciation to t he government o f
the Republic by the g overnment of t he c ountry w here t he act w as committed.
Article 1 1 — I nternational Offenses.
The criminal l aw o f t he R epublic applies to p iracy, human trafficking, slave t rade, and drug
trafficking, even i f committed o utside t he territory o f t he Republic.
However, no f oreigner m ay b e tried o n the t erritory o f t he Republic f or the acts r eferred t o i n
this a rticle, c ommitted a broad, unless h e has b een arrested on t he territory o f t he
Republic and has n ot b een e xtradited and p rovided that t he prosecution is i nitiated b y t he public
prosecutor.
Article 12 — General j urisdiction of t he c ourts of t he R epublic.
Subject to the exceptions p rovided f or in t his chapter, t he courts o f t he Republic h ave jurisdiction
to hear all o ffences t o w hich i ts c riminal l aw a pplies.
CHAPTER IV
OF FOREIGN L AW AND CRIMINAL SENTENCES.
Article 1 3 — E xclusion of f oreign law.
Subject to Articles 9 and 1 0 a nd t his chapter, f oreign criminal l aw h as no e ffect b efore t he
courts o f the R epublic.
Article 1 4 — F oreign awards.


Criminal s entences handed d own against anyone b y foreign c ourts shall o nly h ave e ffect o n
the territory of t he R epublic i f:
(a) T he act i s qualified a s a crime o r common law offense b y the criminal l aw of t he
Republic;
(b) T he r egularity of t he s entence, its final n ature and i ts conformity with the public o rder of t he
Republic a re e stablished by the c ourt s eized o f a prosecution against the same person o r by
the c ourt o f a ppeal o f t he r esidence of t he convicted person s eized b y the public prosecutor.
Article 1 5 — E ffects of f oreign awards.
The said criminal s entences:
(a) A re t aken into consideration for r ecidivism a nd relegation, for t he granting o r revocation
of s uspended sentence, for the r evocation o f c onditional release, for rehabilitation
and amnesty;
(b) P revent any f urther p rosecution f or t he same acts i n the territory of t he Republic, provided
that i n t he e vent o f c onviction the s entence has been served or prescribed or that a pardon
has b een g ranted.
Article 1 6 — E nforcement o f f oreign judgments.
(1) When t he s entences referred to a nd recorded under t he conditions p rovided f or in Article 1 4 h ave
been pronounced against citizens o r r esidents a nd h ave n ot been executed in another c ountry, they
are enforceable i n t he t erritory of t he R epublic, unless t he convicted p erson h as been c onditionally
released, pardoned or a mnestied, or u nless his s entence has been p rescribed.
(2) It i s u p t o t he c ourt s eized u nder the c onditions provided f or in Article 1 4 t o o rder the execution
of t his penalty a nd to p ronounce, where a ppropriate, t he security measures that the law of t he Republic
attaches to t he said offences.
TITLE II
PENALTIES AND SECURITY MEASURES.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS.
Article 1 7 — L egality of p enalties a nd offenses.
Penalties and measures a re s et b y law and are o nly i mposed f or legally provided o ffences.
Article 1 8 — P rincipal penalties.
The main p enalties are:


- T he death penalty;
- I mprisonment
- T he fine.
Article 19 — A ccessory penalties.
The accessory penalties are:
- F orfeitures;
- P ublication of t he judgment;
- T he closure o f t he e stablishment;
- C onfiscation.
Article 20 — S ecurity measures.
The safety m easures a re:
- T he ban on p racticing t he profession;
- R elegation;
- P ost-penal m onitoring a nd assistance measures;
- I nternment in a nursing h ome;
- C onfiscation.
Article 21 — C lassification of o ffenses.
(1) Offenses are classified a s crimes, misdemeanors and c ontraventions according to the main
penalties which p unish t hem:
(a) Offenses punishable b y the d eath penalty o r a custodial sentence of more t han t en years are
deemed to b e c rimes;
(b) Offenses p unishable b y a custodial s entence or a fine are d eemed t o be misdemeanors when t he
custodial sentence incurred i s g reater than t en days a nd d oes not exceed t en years or w hen the
maximum fine is g reater than 25,000 f rancs.
(c) Offenses punishable by i mprisonment n ot exceeding t en days o r a fine n ot exceeding 2 5,000 f rancs
are deemed to b e c ontraventions.
(2) The nature o f a n o ffence is n ot c hanged:


(a) where, as a r esult o f the a dmission of a n e xcuse o r mitigating circumstances, t he p enalty
imposed is t hat f or a nother c ategory o f offences;
b) In c ases of a ggravation provided f or in Articles 88 and 8 9 o f this Code.
CHAPTER II
MAIN P ENALTIES.
Section I
THE DEATH P ENALTY.
Article 22 — Conditions p recedent to e xecution.
(1) Any death s entence s hall be submitted t o the P resident o f t he R epublic f or the e xercise o f h is right of
pardon.
(2) Until the P resident o f t he R epublic h as ruled on t he p ardon of the c onvicted p erson, n o death
sentence m ay be executed.
(3) A pregnant w oman i s n ot s ubject t o the d eath penalty until after giving b irth.
(4) No p erformance may take place o n S undays and p ublic h olidays.
Article 23 — Execution.
(1) A person s entenced to d eath shall be e xecuted b y shooting or hanging as decided by the j udgment
convicting h im. The execution s hall be public, u nless otherwise decided by the d ecision r ejecting t he
application f or c lemency.
(2) The bodies o f the t ortured a re h anded o ver to their families, if they request them, on the c ondition
that t hey h ave t hem b uried w ithout any c eremony.
(3) Only t he m inutes o f e xecution and, where appropriate, a n official p ress r elease m ay b e p ublished in
the p ress.
(4) A decree s hall s et out the c onditions for the a pplication o f this article.
Section I I
IMPRISONMENT.
Article 24 — Imprisonment.
Imprisonment i s a c ustodial sentence d uring w hich t he c onvicted p erson is required t o work u nless t he
court d ecides otherwise a nd provides r easons.
Article 25 ( new. — L . N o. 78-11 of December 2 9, 1 978).Salary.


(1) T he p roduct o f t he prisoner's work s hall be a llocated as f ollows:
- 2 /3 to t he T reasury;
- 1 /3 to b uild u p the n est egg.
(2) T he t erms o f a pplication o f t his article, in particular the c onditions f or managing the s avings, a re set
by d ecree.
Section I II
THE D ETENTION.
Article 26 — Repealed L . N o. 9 1/007 of J uly 30, 1991 a mending Article 2 of Law No. 90/061 o f December
19, 1990
[
Detention.
Detention is a c ustodial sentence imposed f or a crime o r political o ffense during which the c onvicts a re
not required t o w ork and serve their s entence in s pecial establishments. Otherwise, t hey are s eparated
from those c onvicted by law.
common.
]
Section I V
PROVISIONS C OMMON TO P ENALTY D EPRIVATION.
Article 27 — S tart of t he s entence.
(1) If the c onvicted p erson i s not in p reventive detention o r i f a n arrest or c ommittal w arrant i s not i ssued
against h im a t t he hearing u nder the c onditions provided for by t he C ode o f Criminal Procedure, the c ustodial
sentence m ay o nly be executed w hen t he conviction h as become final.
(2) I f a woman s entenced to a c ustodial sentence is p regnant or has just given birth, she s hall
not serve h er s entence u ntil s ix w eeks after giving birth.
(3) A p regnant woman placed i n preventive d etention shall c ontinue t o benefit from the p reventive
detention r egime u ntil t he expiry o f t he p eriod r eferred to in t he p receding paragraph.
(4) A h usband a nd wife sentenced for different o ffences to a term of imprisonment of less
than o ne year and not detained on t he d ay o f judgment m ay, at their r equest, not s erve their sentence
simultaneously if, providing p roof o f a c ommon d omicile, they have in t heir c are a nd c ustody a child a ged
under e ighteen years.
Article 28 — C alculation o f t he penalty.


(1) T he c ustodial s entence e xpressed in d ays i s c alculated per twenty-four hours.
(2) T he p enalty of o ne m onth i s t hirty d ays.
(3) T he s entence e xpressed in m onths and y ears is c alculated from date t o d ate.
(4) S ubject to the p rovisions o f A rticle 5 3, t he starting p oint of t he s entence i s f ixed:
(a) O n the d ay t he c onvicted person is i mprisoned in e xecution o f t he s entence;
(b) In t he event of confusion of s entences o n t he day o f the first incarceration in execution o f one o f t he
combined sentences.
(5) In t he event o f escape, t he period during which the c onvicted person w as on t he r un i s excluded f rom t he
calculation o f t he length o f the sentence.
Article 2 9 — Separation of minors.
Minors under t he a ge o f e ighteen s erve their c ustodial sentence i n s pecial establishments.
Otherwise, t hey are separated from adult prisoners.
CHAPTER III
ACCESSORY PENALTIES.
Section I
OF D EFAULTS.
Article 3 0 — Definition.
The f orfeitures consist o f:
1° I n the d ismissal a nd e xclusion f rom all functions, employment or p ublic o ffices;
2° U nable to b e a j uror, assessor, e xpert, juror-expert;
3° I n the p rohibition o f b eing a g uardian, c urator, subrogated g uardian o r j udicial c ouncil, except f or
one's o wn children, or a m ember o f a f amily c ouncil;
4° I n the p rohibition o f w earing any decoration;
5° I n the p rohibition t o s erve in t he a rmed f orces;
6° I n the p rohibition of r unning a s chool or e ven teaching in a n educational establishment a nd, i n
general, of o ccupying f unctions r elating to t he e ducation or c are of c hildren.


Article 3 1 — Application.
(1) A life sentence c arries w ith i t t he forfeitures provided for in t he preceding article.
(2) A ny other c onviction for a c rime c arries t he same f orfeitures for t he duration of t he s entence and for t en y ears
following its expiration or conditional r elease if t he latter h as n ot b een r evoked.
(3) T he c ourt may, in all c ases p rovided for i n the preceding paragraph, b y r easoned d ecision, relieve t he convicted
person o f a ll or part o f t hese d eadlines a nd reduce t heir d uration to t wo years.
(4) I n t he e vent of c onviction for a n o ffence and where the l aw authorises t hem t o d o s o, t he courts may, by
reasoned d ecision, p ronounce f or a p eriod o f u p to f ive years all or part o f the f orfeitures provided for i n
the p receding article.
Article 3 2 — Forfeitures a nd contumacy.
In t he e vent of c onviction i n absentia, f orfeitures are i ncurred from t he d ay t he publicity measures
provided f or i n the C ode of Criminal P rocedure a re c ompleted.
Section I I
OTHER A CCESSORY P ENALTIES
Article 3 3 — (L. 9 3-013 o f December 2 2, 1993) P ublication of the j udgment.
(1) I n c ases where t he T ribunal or the Court m ay order t he p ublication of i ts decision, it s hall b e p osted u nder t he
conditions s et by decree f or a maximum period o f t wo months i n t he event o f c onviction for a c rime o r offence
and f or a m aximum period of f ifteen d ays in the event o f a contravention.
(2) I n t he s ame c ases, t he T ribunal or t he Court m ay also order t he publication of i ts decision in t he newspapers
it i ndicates, on radio or o n t elevision.
(3) These publications a re made at t he expense o f the c onvicted person.
(4) I nformation in the w ritten p ress, radio a nd television a s w ell a s o bjective commentary are f ree.
Article 3 4 — Closure of t he e stablishment.
In c ases where t he T ribunal or t he Court may o rder t he closure o f a c ommercial o r i ndustrial
establishment o r p rofessional p remises u sed t o commit an o ffence, this measure shall e ntail a p rohibition f or t he
convicted person o r f or t he third p arty to w hom the convicted person h as s old, transferred or l eased the
establishment o r p rofessional premises f rom carrying o ut the s ame trade, i ndustry o r p rofession i n t he same
premises.
Article 3 5 — Confiscation of “ corpus delicti”.


(1) In the event o f conviction f or a c rime o r offence, the c ourt o r t ribunal may o rder the c onfiscation
of any movable o r immovable p roperty belonging t o t he c onvicted person a nd s eized, where s uch p roperty
has served as a n i nstrument f or c ommitting the o ffence o r i s t he p roduct t hereof.
(2) In matters o f contravention, t his confiscation m ay o nly b e ordered i n cases d etermined by l aw.
CHAPTER IV
SAFETY MEASURES.
Section I
THE PROHIBITION O F THE P ROFESSION.
Article 36 — P rohibition of the p rofession.
(1) A ban on practicing a p rofession m ay be imposed by a r easoned d ecision a gainst p ersons c onvicted of
a crime or common l aw offence when it i s f ound t hat t he o ffence c ommitted h as a d irect r elationship
with the practice o f the profession a nd t here are serious f ears t hat this practice m ay constitute a danger
of relapse for the convicted person.
(2) This prohibition is imposed f or a period which m ay not b e less t han o ne year n or more than f ive
years, from the day on w hich t he sentence w as served, except i n cases w here t he l aw provides
otherwise.
(3) In the event of a r epeat o ffense under the conditions p rovided f or i n paragraph 1 a nd in article 88 for a
crime or offense o f the same n ature, the ban b ecomes perpetual.
Section II
RELEGATION
Article 37 — Definition o f r elegation.
(1) Relegation is internment for a p eriod of f ive to t wenty years under a r egime o f work a nd social
rehabilitation during which t he relegated p ersons a re, in the a bsence of a special establishment, separated
from the convicts who are serving t heir s entences.
(2) Decrees regulate t he operating conditions o f t he e stablishment, the w ork r egime a nd the s ocial
rehabilitation of relegated p ersons.
Article 38 — Persons e xcluded from r elegation.
Convicted p ersons who are under twenty-five o r o ver s ixty years o ld a t t he e nd o f the m ain sentence m ay
not be relegated.
Article 39 — Conditions o f r elegation.


(1) (Law N o. 6 7-LF-1 of J une 1 2, 1 967): A repeat offender may b e r elegated if, within the p eriod of t en y ears, n ot
including s entences served and security measures involving deprivation o f l iberty, he h as i ncurred, taking i nto
account the s entence h anded down f or the new offense c ommitted, e ither:
(a) Two s entences o f i mprisonment for a c rime o r o f t he d eath p enalty o riginally commuted to
imprisonment;
(b) One o f t he convictions p rovided for i n paragraph (a) and t wo convictions for o ffences o f m ore than o ne
year's imprisonment;
(c) Four convictions for offences of m ore t han o ne y ear's i mprisonment.
(2) The s tarting point o f t he a forementioned t en-year p eriod i s the d ate o f t he l ast offence l ikely t o l ead t o
relegation.
(3) The c onvictions r etained f or relegation must be f inal a nd e ach o f t he f acts m otivating these c onvictions must
be subsequent to t he p revious c onviction which became f inal.
(4) Convictions which h ave b een pardoned, commuted or r educed in sentence s hall be t aken i nto account.
(5) No a ccount s hall be t aken o f t hose w hich h ave been e rased b y r ehabilitation o r b y amnesty.
(6) C onvictions handed d own a gainst minors aged u nder eighteen at the t ime the o ffences w ere committed s hall
not be t aken i nto account.
Section I II
POST-CRIMINAL SURVEILLANCE AND A SSISTANCE
Article 40 — D efinition a nd d uration.
(1) Any p erson s entenced t o a c ustodial sentence of m ore than o ne y ear m ay, t aking i nto a ccount t he f acts of
the c ase and b y reasoned d ecision, be p laced b y t he c ourt w hich sentences h im a nd f or a m aximum p eriod of
five y ears under the post-penal s upervision and assistance regime c omprising g eneral obligations a nd,
where appropriate, special o bligations.
(2) The o bservation o f t hese o bligations b y the c onvicted person i s monitored by a m agistrate designated f or t his
purpose, assisted b y v oluntary or paid s upervisors.
However, this c ontrol is exercised b y the p olice a uthorities w hen i t concerns a n i ndividual convicted of a
crime o r a repeat offender convicted of an o ffence.
(3) A d ecree determines the c onditions of a pplication of t his article.
Article 41 — G eneral o bligations (Law N o. 6 9-LF-2 o f June 14, 1 969).
The g eneral o bligations w hich are a utomatically imposed o n t he c onvicted person a re a s follows:


1° Establish one's domicile in a s pecific place;
2° Respond t o s ummons from t he authority r esponsible for t he monitoring and assistance
mission;
3° Receive visits f rom the supervisor and provide h im with i nformation o r d ocuments likely
to enable the monitoring o f h is m eans of e xistence;
4° Notify or justify t o t he supervisor the r easons for h is c hanges of e mployment or r esidence;
5° Notify the supervisor of a ny a bsence exceeding f ifteen d ays and advise h im of h is r eturn;
6° Obtain p rior authorization f rom t he authority responsible for t his mission b efore a ny trip
abroad.
Article 42 — Special obligations.
In addition to the general obligations i mposed by A rticle 41, t he court may impose o n t he c onvicted
person a ll or part o f t he following obligations:
1° Establish residence in one o r more specific places;
2° Not t o a ppear in certain specific p laces, except w ith special a nd temporary
authorization;
3° Carry out a p rofessional activity, follow an e ducation o r r eceive p rofessional training;
4° Submit t o c ontrol, t reatment or care m easures, even u nder t he h ospitalization r egime, i n
particular for t he purposes o f d etoxification;
5° Contribute t o f amily expenses or r egularly pay m aintenance;
6° Repair t he damage c aused b y t he offense;
7° Not to d rive certain v ehicles determined by t he license c ategories i n f orce;
8° Do not frequent c ertain p laces such as b ars, racecourses, gambling houses;
9° Do n ot place b ets;
10° Refrain f rom a ny excess of a lcoholic beverages;
11° Not t o a ssociate w ith certain convicted p ersons, in p articular co-authors o r a ccomplices of
the o ffense;


12° Refrain f rom r eceiving or h osting c ertain people a t your h ome.
Section IV
INTERNMENT IN A N URSING HOME
Article 43 — The m entally ill.
(1) I n the event o f acquittal on g rounds of insanity o f t he perpetrator o f a c rime or o ffence p unishable b y a
prison s entence o f at least t wo years, and where the liberty o f the accused i s r ecognised a s d angerous t o p ublic
order b y t he court s eised o f t he matter, the latter shall o rder h is i nternment in a s pecial h ealth c entre.
(2) T his jurisdiction alone m ay terminate t he internment after a dvice f rom t he competent m edical authority
certifying that the liberty of t he internee n o l onger p resents a ny danger t o p ublic o rder.
Article 44 — Mental i nfirmity.
(1) When a person who i s a n a lcoholic, a drug a ddict o r s uffers f rom m ental i nfirmity is c onvicted o f a
crime o r offence punishable b y a prison sentence of a t l east t wo y ears i n r elation t o h is habits o r m ental s tate a nd
his freedom is r ecognised as d angerous to p ublic o rder, t he court s eised m ay o rder h is i nternment in a s pecial
health c entre.
(2) Internment may not exceed t wo y ears for t he t reatment of an a lcoholic or d rug a ddict a nd five y ears
for t he treatment of a mentally d isabled person.
(3) This jurisdiction may shorten t he period i t h ad set, a fter a dvice f rom t he competent m edical authority
certifying t hat the liberty o f t he internee n o l onger p resents a ny d anger to p ublic o rder.
Section V
OF C ONFISCATION
Article 45 — Confiscation.
Things whose manufacture, possession, sale o r u se are i llicit are confiscated e ven i f t hey d o n ot belong to t he
convicted person o r i f t he prosecution h as not resulted i n a conviction.
CHAPTER V
OF P REVENTIVE C OMMITMENT.
Article 46 — Conditions.
(1) It may be imposed by t he President of the Tribunal o n a ny p erson w ho b y h is c onduct s hows a n
unequivocal i ntention t o commit a n o ffence l ikely to d isturb t he


public p eace, to u ndertake personally and, where a ppropriate, w ith s olvent guarantors t o p ay the f ixed sum i f
he c ommits a n offense o f this n ature d uring t he s pecified period.
(2) T he a mount i s s et according to the possibilities o f the e mployee.
Article 47 — D uration.
This commitment m ay be imposed for a p eriod of o ne year, w hich may b e extended to t hree years in t he c ase
of a habitual offender.
Article 48 — C ommitment o f p arents or g uardian.
In t he e vent t hat a m inor u nder eighteen y ears of a ge has committed acts c lassified as an offence, the p resident
of t he c ourt m ay impose on his o r her father, mother, g uardian or c ustomary guardian t he c ommitment provided
for in Article 4 6 in t he event t hat the minor c ommits a cts o f t he s ame nature w ithin a period o f o ne y ear w ithout the
person c ommitted p roviding p roof t hat he o r she h as taken a ll necessary measures t o e nsure that the m inor
does not commit t he offence.
Article 49 — R efusal o f c ommitment.
(1) A ny p erson w ho has not complied w ith t he undertaking i mposed o n him o r w ho h as not p rovided t he r equired
guarantor may be immediately imprisoned u ntil his a cceptance o r u ntil t he d esignation o f t he g uarantor(s) without
the duration of this measure being able t o exceed t he d uration o f the p eriod p rovided f or in t he u ndertaking.
(2) E xcept i n the case provided f or in A rticle 4 8, t he s pecial obligations r eferred to i n A rticle 4 2 (1° a nd 2°) m ay
replace incarceration.
Article 50 — N on-compliance.
(1) I f the u ndertaking has not been c omplied w ith, the c ourt h earing t he o ffence s hall, i n t he e vent of c onviction,
order p ayment o f the sum fixed without prejudice to t he p enalties relating t o t he o ffence.
(2) W ith r egard to the person l iable, this sum is recovered by the s ame means as the f ine and with r egard t o t he
guarantor(s) by a ny civil means.
CHAPTER VI
OF T HE NON-ACCUMULATION O F PENALTIES.
Article 51 — N on-accumulation.
(1) W here a n i ndividual is prosecuted f or several related crimes, o ffences o r c ontraventions, t he m ost s evere
penalty s hall be i mposed.
(2) I n t he e vent t hat an individual i s s ubject to several c onvictions for crimes or o ffences r esulting f rom
various p rosecutions, the merger of the principal penalties may b e ordered. I n t he e vent


cumulatively, t he t otal o f the s entences imposed cannot e xceed t he m aximum sentence
incurred f or the most serious offense.
(3) When a p rincipal s entence i s r emitted, the c ommuted s entence a nd not t he s entence i nitially
imposed must be taken into account for t he accumulation o f s entences.
(4) The rule o f n on-accumulation o f sentences does n ot a pply to t wo c onvictions, the f irst
of which h ad b ecome f inal b efore t he c ommission o f t he a cts w hich gave r ise to t he s econd.
(5) In m atters of contravention, penalties a re always cumulative, unless t he court d ecides o therwise.
(6) I n the event o f conviction for s everal o ffences, p enalties other t han t he p rincipal penalties and
security measures shall b e cumulative, u nless otherwise decided b y the c ourt seised.
Article 52 ( new).- — E xecution order.
(1) C ustodial s entences are executed i n the chronological o rder o f notification o f the d etention certificates to the
convicted p erson.
(2) T he accessory penalties a nd t he i nternment provided f or in A rticle 4 3 a re immediately
applicable, w hile t he o ther s ecurity m easures are applicable upon expiry of t he m ain
penalty or i ts suspension.
(3) Where s everal s ecurity m easures are to be executed c umulatively, t heir order of execution i s a s
follows:
(a) I nternment in a n ursing h ome;
b) R elegation;
(c) P ost-penal m easures.
(4) I f, during the e xecution of o ne o f these measures, the c onvicted p erson i ncurs a custodial
sentence f or a nother c rime o r offence, t he e xecution of t he s ecurity measure is suspended and
the new sentence i s s erved first.
Article 53 — Preventive detention.
(1) I n the event o f pre-trial d etention, the d uration o f t his d etention i s deducted in f ull f rom the
custodial s entence imposed.
(2) W here t here h as b een preventive d etention and t he s entence i mposed i s a fine, the
court seized m ay exempt the c onvicted p erson f rom a ll or part o f t he p ayment.
CHAPTER VII
CAUSES W HICH OBSTACLE T HE EXECUTION O F S ENTENCES.
Section I


SIMPLE REPEAL.
Article 54 — C onditions o f a pplication and e ffects.
(1) I n t he event o f conviction for a c rime o r misdemeanor to a term of i mprisonment of l ess t han o r e qual to five
years o r t o a fine, e xcept i n t he case provided f or in A rticle 9 2 (2) and i f the c onvicted p erson has not b een s ubject
to a previous and unexpunged c onviction to imprisonment, the c ourt s eized m ay o rder, unless o therwise
provided b y law and by r easoned d ecision, that t he e xecution o f t he p rincipal s entence be suspended f or a
period of t hree to five years.
(2) T he s uspension h as no effect on the accessory penalties and on t he m easures r esulting f rom the
conviction.
(3) I f during the p eriod t hus fixed, c ounting from the d ay on which the j udgment or o rder b ecomes final,
the c onvicted p erson c ommits a nother crime o r offense f ollowed b y a sentence of i mprisonment
without probation, t he suspended s entence shall be executed a s a priority and w ithout confusion w ith t he s econd
sentence.
(4) O therwise, t he expiry o f the time limit p roduces t he e ffects provided f or in A rticle 6 9.
(5) T he p rovisions of this a rticle a re applicable b etween s everal s uccessive sentences o f detention.
Section I I
SUSPENDED SENTENCE W ITH PROBATION.
Article 55 — C onditions d 'application.
(1) A suspended s entence with p robation m ay be imposed u nder the s ame conditions as a simple
suspended s entence when the sentence is e qual to o r g reater than s ix months o f i mprisonment.
(2) I t may also be granted to individuals p reviously sentenced to a suspended p rison s entence or t o a n
unsuspended p rison s entence of less t han s ix months.
(3) T he p robationary p eriod m ay not be l ess t han t hree y ears nor more t han f ive years.
(4) S ubject t o t he p rovisions of paragraphs 1 a nd 2 of t his article, article 54 is a pplicable to s uspended s entences
with probation.
Article 56 — T he probation regime.
(1) T he p robation regime i ncludes g eneral and, w here a ppropriate, s pecial obligations o f s upervision and
assistance.
(2) T he o bservation o f these obligations b y t he convicted p erson is m onitored by a magistrate designated for this
purpose, assisted by v oluntary or paid p robation d elegates.


(3) T he d esignation of the probation d elegate i s made by the magistrate responsible f or supervision
who m ay modify it.
(4) T he magistrate of the residence o f t he convicted p erson r esponsible for s upervision m ay a t any
time a nd b y r easoned d ecision suspend a ll o r p art o f t he special o bligations o r m odify t hem
without a ggravation.
Article 57 — G eneral o bligations.
The g eneral o bligations i mposed by A rticle 41 on t he convicted person w ith r egard to t he supervisor
are a utomatically imposed on t he c onvicted person p laced u nder t he probation r egime with regard
to the probation officer.
Article 58 — S pecial obligations.
In addition to the general obligations i mposed by the p receding a rticle, t he j udgment or o rder may r equire the
convicted person with p robation t o o bserve all or part of the o bligations referred t o in A rticle 4 2 o f t his Code.
Article 59 — O bligations of t he d elegate.
(1) The p robation o fficer must e nsure t hat t he c onvicted person c omplies with the g eneral and s pecial obligations
to which h e is s ubject; he i s also required to encourage and s upport the c onvicted person's efforts towards
his s ocial r ehabilitation, particularly with r egard t o h is family and p rofessional r ehabilitation.
(2) He i s required t o provide him w ith all m oral assistance a nd, in t he event that the c onvicted person
needs material a ssistance, it is h is responsibility t o r efer the m atter to t he d esignated Magistrate so
that a ssistance can be provided to h im b y a ny assistance o r s ocial a id organization.
(3) He m ust k eep t his magistrate r egularly informed o f the e xercise of h is mission and r efer it to h im i n the e vent
of difficulties.
Article 60 — B reach o f o bligations.
(1) If, during the probationary p eriod, t he convicted person f ails to c omply with any o f the g eneral or s pecial
obligations o f his probation, the court which p ronounced the s entence m ay o rder the e xecution o f t he
suspended sentence.
(2) The e xecution of t his sentence does n ot e ntail t he r evocation o f a s imple suspension p reviously granted.
(3) If the s uspension h as n ot b een r evoked under this section o r s ection 5 4, t he e xpiry o f the p eriod
shall h ave the e ffects o f s ection 69.
Section I II
OF PAROLE.
Article 61 — D efinition.


(1) Conditional r elease is t he early r elease of a p erson s entenced t o a c ustodial s entence or m easure.
(2) It i s granted a nd revoked b y decree.
(3) A decree s hall l ay down the general conditions a nd p rocedures for granting and r evoking c onditional r elease.
(4) This suspension, if it has n ot been revoked, becomes final u pon expiry o f the term of the sentence.
Article 62 — Suspension o f measures.
(1) The conditional r elease decree m ay suspend the execution o f measures of internment in a
special health f acility, relegation, post-penal surveillance and a ssistance or p rohibition f rom exercising a p rofession
which follow the main s entence.
(2) This suspension b ecomes final f ive y ears a fter the expiry o f the main penalty.
Article 63 — Time limit for granting.
(1) Conditional r elease may only b e granted t o a c onvicted person a fter completing half of
his sentence o r half o f a ll t he sentences i n the event of accumulation, t aking into a ccount, where a pplicable, a ny
pardon m easures.
(2) It m ay only be granted t o a repeat offender a fter c ompleting two-thirds of his s entence.
(3) Conditional r elease may only b e granted t o the relegated p erson a fter five years.
Article 64 — Revocation.
(1) Conditional r elease may be revoked i n the event o f conviction f or a c rime or offence committed s ubsequently
or failure to c omply with t he general or s pecial c onditions o f release.
(2) In t he e vent of r evocation, the t ime spent on parole shall not be counted t owards t he remainder of the
sentence to b e served.
Section I V
SUSPENSION OF POST-CRIMINAL MEASURES.
Article 65 — Suspension o f post-penal m easures.
(1) On the p roposal o f t he a uthority referred t o i n Article 40 (2), the court which o rdered the post-criminal m easures
may at a ny t ime a nd by reasoned d ecision s uspend the special measures i n whole or in part or modify
them without a ggravating t hem.


(2) T he suspension m ay be revoked at a ny t ime in t he m anner provided for i ts g ranting.
(3) T he duration o f t he suspension o f t hese measures, even if revoked, is c ounted in t he d uration o f the p ost-
penal m easures.
Section V
GRACE, PRESCRIPTION, DEATH.
Article 66 — P ardon.
Pardon i s the c ommutation or p artial o r t otal remission, c onditional o r not, o f sentences, security
measures and probation o bligations.
Article 67 — T he p rescription.
(1) T he principal p enalty n ot served, a s well as the a ccessory penalties and s ecurity m easures which
accompany it, may no l onger be executed a fter the e xpiry of the t ime l imits determined below
from t he date o f t he judgment or ruling w hich h as b ecome final:
(a) F or crime: t wenty y ears;
(b) F or m isdemeanor and related c ontravention: five years;
(c) F or a ny o ther c ontravention: two years.
(2) T he limitation p eriod is s uspended w henever an obstacle of law or f act, other than t hat r esulting from
the will of t he convicted person, p revents the e xecution of the s entence.
(3) I t is interrupted by any act o f e xecution o f the p enalty b efore the e xpiation of the p eriod.
(4) O nce t he limitation p eriod for the sentence h as e xpired, the p erson c onvicted in a bsentia o r i n c ontumacy
may no l onger a ppear to s erve it.
Article 68 — D eath.
The d eath o f t he convicted p erson d oes n ot p revent the execution of financial s entences on his assets or the
closure o f t he establishment (added b y L aw N o. 6 7-LF-1 o f June 1 2, 1967): " nor confiscation".
CHAPTER VIII
CAUSES WHICH E RASE THE CONDEMNATION
Section I
LA R EHABILITATION.
Article 69 — D efinition a nd e ffects.


(1) Rehabilitation, acquired automatically or by c ourt d ecision, e rases t he conviction f or a c rime or o ffence and p uts
an e nd to a ny a ccessory penalty and any s ecurity m easure, with t he exception of internment in a
nursing h ome a nd the c losure of t he establishment.
(2) It i s indivisible a nd must c over all c onvictions n ot yet e xpunged.
(3) It i s in all cases subject t o the payment of c osts d ue t o t he Treasury a nd t o c ompensation for t he
civil party.
(4) The amount of f inancial p enalties, f ines, c onfiscations, paid by the rehabilitated person, remains
acquired b y the T reasury.
(5) Rehabilitation d oes n ot a utomatically restore decorations and d oes not automatically r einstate t he person i n
the o rders from w hich t hey have b een deprived.
(6) It d oes n ot a utomatically reinstate in p ublic functions or j obs, r anks, p ublic or m inisterial offices a nd d oes not
give rise to c areer r econstruction.
(7) It d oes n ot p revent r equests for r eview aimed at establishing the innocence of the rehabilitated person.
Article 70 — Rehabilitation of r ight.
(1) Rehabilitation is acquired automatically by a c onvicted person w ho has n ot been subject t o any new
sentence o f i mprisonment or d etention for a crime or o ffence within t he following time limits:
- F ine: five y ears;
- S ingle s entence o f imprisonment or d etention n ot exceeding six months: ten years
;
- Single s entence o f imprisonment o r detention which d oes n ot e xceed t wo y ears: f ifteen y ears;
- Single s entence o f imprisonment o r detention not exceeding f ive y ears: t wenty years;
(2) The p eriod i s fifteen y ears i f the total o f the convictions does not exceed o ne y ear a nd t wenty y ears if the
total o f t he c onvictions is m ore than o ne year but does not exceed t wo years.
(3) Convictions h anded down concurrently are c onsidered as a s ingle conviction.
(4) For fines, t he time limits r un f rom the d ay of payment o r from the date of prescription a nd f or c ustodial
sentences from t he d ay o f e xpiry o f the sentence served, t aking into a ccount, where a pplicable, a ny r emissions of
grace, o r from the d ate o f p rescription.
Article 71 — Judicial r ehabilitation.


(1) R ehabilitation may also be requested in c ourt b y the convicted p erson after a p eriod of five y ears for those
convicted of a crime a nd three y ears f or t hose c onvicted o f an offence.
(2) This p eriod starts f rom t he day of r elease f or those sentenced to a c ustodial s entence and from t he day o f
payment of t he fine.
(3) T he t ime limits p rovided for in this article shall b e doubled i f t he c onvicted p ersons are in a state of l egal recidivism or
have prescribed their sentence. I n the e vent of prescription of t he sentence, t he time l imit s tarts from the d ay o n w hich
the p rescription becomes acquired.
Article 72 — P ost-mortem period.
(1) In t he event o f t he death o f t he convicted person and i f the legal conditions a re met, t he request for
rehabilitation may b e followed and even made by h is s pouse, a scendants or d escendants within o ne year f rom the
date of death.
(2) The request for r ehabilitation a lready m ade may be followed by the p ublic prosecutor.
Section II
AMNESTY.
Article 73 — E ffects.
(1) Subject to c ivil interests, amnesty e rases the c onviction a nd puts a n end to any p rincipal and accessory p enalty
and a ny security m easure, with t he exception of internment in a n ursing h ome a nd t he closure o f the
establishment.
(2) Unless otherwise provided, it p revents or stops proceedings n ot brought or a lready i n progress.
course.
(3) Unless otherwise provided, it i s not applicable t o costs due t o the T reasury if the conviction h as
become final.
(4) Unless otherwise provided, the c osts, fines a nd c onfiscations already p aid b y t he convicted p erson shall remain
the property of the Treasury.
(5) U nless otherwise provided, it d oes not automatically restore decorations a nd d oes n ot a utomatically r einstate
in o rders from which t he amnestied person h as b een d eprived.
(6) U nless otherwise provided, it d oes not automatically reinstate i n public f unctions or j obs, ranks, public
or ministerial offices and d oes not g ive r ise t o c areer r econstruction.
(7) I t does n ot prevent requests f or review a imed at establishing the i nnocence o f the amnestied convicted
person.
TITLE III
FROM CRIMINAL L IABILITY.


CHAPTER I
GENERAL P ROVISIONS.
Article 74 — P unishment and l iability.
(1) N o penalty m ay be imposed e xcept o n a p erson who i s c riminally responsible.
(2) A person w ho voluntarily commits acts constituting the c onstituent e lements of a n offence w ith t he i ntention
that these a cts will result i n t he commission of the offence i s c riminally liable.
(3) E xcept w here t he law p rovides o therwise, the i ntended c onsequence of a n omission does not e ntail
criminal l iability.
(4) E xcept w here t he law p rovides o therwise, criminal l iability may a rise only i f the c onditions of paragraph 2 are
met.
However, in contravention matters, c riminal l iability exists, e ven if the a ct o r o mission is n ot i ntentional or
the consequence w as n ot intended.
Article 75 — I gnorance a nd m otive.
Ignorance of t he l aw a nd m otive d o not affect criminal l iability.
Article 76 — E xecution o f t he l aw.
No act o rdered or authorized b y l aw a nd carried o ut i n a ccordance w ith t he l aw constitutes a n offense.
CHAPTER II
CAUSES W HICH REMOVE OR A TTENT CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
Article 7 7 — Unforeseeable c ircumstances a nd m aterial constraints.
Criminal l iability c annot r esult from f ortuitous events o r i rresistible material constraints.
Article 78 — D ementia.
(1) C riminal l iability c annot a rise from t he act o f a n individual s uffering f rom a mental illness such that h is
will w as abolished or he was u nable to be aware of t he r eprehensible nature o f h is a ct.
(2) I f the dementia is not total, i t constitutes a m itigating excuse.
Article 79 — I ntoxication.


Intoxication t hat i s not v oluntary is c onsidered mental i llness.
Article 80 — T he minority.
(1) A m inor under t en years o f a ge is n ot c riminally responsible.
(2) A m inor aged ten to f ourteen who i s criminally responsible m ay o nly b e subject t o o ne o f t he s pecial measures
provided f or by l aw.
(3) A m inor aged over fourteen and under e ighteen w ho i s criminally responsible b enefits f rom the m itigating
excuse.
(4) A p erson o ver eighteen years o f a ge is f ully responsible.
(5) The a ge of the p erpetrator is calculated o n t he date of the commission of t he offence.
Article 81 — T hreats.
(1) Criminal l iability m ay not arise f rom t he act o f an i ndividual subject to a n i mminent a nd o therwise
unavoidable t hreat of d eath o r serious injury a s provided f or i n this Code.
However, if the act i s an o ffence punishable b y t he d eath p enalty o r i f it has h ad t he e ffect o f c ausing the d eath
or i njuries referred t o a bove, the p erpetrator only b enefits f rom the m itigating e xcuse.
(2) This s ection does n ot a pply t o a nyone who h as voluntarily exposed h imself to t he r isk of s uch threats.
Article 82 — R everential fear.
The m itigating e xcuse is a pplicable:
(a) To a m inor under e ighteen y ears o f a ge w ho has a cted u nder the c onstraint o f h is parents, persons
having custody or customary responsibility;
b) T o employees, w orkers, civil servants w ho acted u nder duress f rom their b osses o r e mployers.
Article 83 — O bedience t o l egal a uthority.
(1) Criminal liability c annot arise f rom a n a ct p erformed o n t he o rders of a competent authority t o w hich
obedience is legitimately d ue.
(2) The p rovisions o f t he preceding p aragraph shall not, h owever, a pply i f the o rder is manifestly
illegitimate.
Article 84 — S elf-defense.


(1) Criminal l iability may n ot a rise from an act r equired by the i mmediate n ecessity of defending oneself or
another o r of a r ight belonging t o o neself o r another a gainst an u nlawful attack, p rovided that the d efense is
proportionate to t he s eriousness of t he a ttack.
(2) There is a lways a f air p roportion between h omicide and the a ttack w hich g ives r ise to fear of either d eath, o r
serious i njuries as provided f or in t his c ode, o r r ape or sodomy.
Article 8 5 — P rovocation.
(1) Any perpetrator of a n offence i mmediately p rovoked by the u nlawful act o f another against himself or in
his presence, against h is spouse, descendant o r a scendant, brother or sister, master or servant, m inor or
incapable p erson i n h is care shall benefit from the mitigating e xcuse if t here i s no d isproportion b etween t he
provocation and t he r eaction.
(2) Homicide a nd injuries a re excusable i f they were caused by blows o r serious v iolence against persons.
(3) They a re a lso excusable if t hey were committed b y one of the s pouses against their s pouse or their
accomplice c aught i n t he act o f a dultery.
(4) The offence is e xcusable o nly when t he p rovocation i s of such a n ature a s to deprive a n ormal p erson o f self-
control.
Article 8 6 — S tate of n ecessity.
Regardless of t he l egitimate d efense provided for i n A rticle 8 4, c riminal l iability c annot result from the a ttack o n
property with the aim o f d iverting from oneself o r another, or from property belonging t o oneself or another, a
serious, i mminent and otherwise u navoidable danger, p rovided that there i s no d isproportion b etween t he
harm t o be averted a nd the measure t aken t o p revent it.
Article 8 7 — Effects o f the mitigating excuse.
(1) Where t he law p rovides for a m itigating excuse, the p enalties a re r educed as follows:
(a) If t he d eath penalty o r a l ife sentence i s incurred, the p enalty shall b e r educed to a c ustodial
sentence of t wo t o t en y ears;
(b) If a p enalty i s i ncurred in t he c ase o f a c rime, the p enalty is reduced to a c ustodial sentence of o ne to
five y ears;
(c) I n t he e vent o f a n offence, the m aximum custodial sentences and fines a re r educed by half, and the
minimum is t hat o f A rticle 92 (1) o f t his Code.
(d) In t he e vent o f a n a ccumulation of mitigating e xcuses or mitigating e xcuses and mitigating
circumstances, the m inimum sentence is that of Article 9 2 ( 1).
CHAPTER III
CAUSES WHICH A GGRAVATE CRIMINAL L IABILITY.


Article 88 (new).- — Repeat o ffense.
(1) A r epeat offender, e xcept i n respect of l ife sentences, is liable to d ouble t he m aximum p enalty p rovided
for:
(a) Any p erson who, a fter h aving b een c onvicted of a c rime o r m isdemeanor, commits a n ew
offense classified a s a c rime or misdemeanor within a p eriod w hich begins t o r un from the d ate o f the
conviction becoming final and which e xpires f ive years a fter the e xecution of t he s entence i mposed o r i ts
prescription
(b) Any person w ho, after h aving b een convicted of a c ontravention, commits a new c ontravention
within a p eriod which b egins t o r un from t he d ate o f t he c onviction becoming f inal and w hich
expires t welve m onths after the e xecution of t he s entence i mposed o r i ts limitation period.
(2) The p rovisions of t his article a re applicable between s everal s uccessive s entences o f d etention.
Article 89 — O fficials.
(1) The s tatus o f c ivil servant, public o fficer or agent in charge o f a public s ervice is an a ggravating circumstance
of criminal l iability a gainst those a mong t hem who, e xcept i n cases where t he l aw specifically r egulates the
penalties incurred f or crimes and offences committed b y t hem, a re guilty o f other crimes or o ffences which they
were responsible f or preventing or repressing.
(2) The p enalty i s t hen increased under t he conditions provided f or i n the p receding article.
CHAPTER IV
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES A ND CHOICE O F S ENTENCE.
Article 90 — M itigating circumstances.
Mitigating circumstances m ay b e a dmitted by reasoned d ecision in f avour of a convicted person, e xcept i n
matters where t he law f ormally e xcludes them.
Article 91 — E ffects in case o f crime.
(1) The p enalties p rovided by law f or a ny accused p erson o r p ersons f ound g uilty of a crime a nd i n whose
favour mitigating circumstances h ave b een granted may b e r educed to t en y ears' d eprivation o f l iberty i f the c rime
is p unishable by death, t o f ive years' deprivation o f l iberty i f the c rime is punishable b y life imprisonment, to
one y ear's deprivation o f l iberty i n other c ases.
(2) If, pursuant to t he p rovisions of t he p receding paragraph, a sentence e qual t o o r l ess than t en y ears o f
deprivation of liberty is imposed, the court may impose on t he c onvicted person a fine w hich may n ot e xceed t wo
million francs.
Article 92 — E ffects in the e vent o f an o ffense or contravention.


(1) Where m itigating circumstances are g ranted in the event o f an offence or contravention, the court may reduce t he
custodial sentence t o f ive days a nd the fine t o o ne franc or impose o nly o ne of these t wo s entences.
(2) Where t he l aw only provides f or a custodial sentence, the court may substitute a f ine o f up to one million francs in
the c ase of a n o ffence and t wenty-five thousand f rancs in the case o f a c ontravention.
Article 9 3 — Choice o f p enalty.
The penalty or m easure imposed w ithin the limits s et or authorized b y law m ust always b e based on the
circumstances of t he offense, t he danger it p resents to public o rder, the personality o f the convicted person a nd his
possibilities of r ehabilitation and the practical possibilities of execution.
CHAPTER V
OF ATTEMPT AND CONSPIRACY.
Article 9 4 — The a ttempt.
(1) Any attempt m anifested by an a ct tending t owards the execution of a c rime o r an offence and unequivocally
implying the i rrevocable i ntention of i ts author t o commit t he offence, if it has n ot been s uspended or if it has f ailed
in effect only by circumstances i ndependent of the will of its a uthor, is considered a s the crime o r
offence i tself.
(2) The attempt i s punishable even if t he desired goal c ould not be achieved due to a f actual circumstance u nknown
to t he p erpetrator.
(3) The preparatory act does n ot constitute an o ffence.
Article 95 — Conspiracy.
(1) There is c onspiracy as soon as the resolution t o commit an offense is concerted and agreed upon b etween
two or m ore persons.
(2) There can b e n o c onspiracy between h usband a nd wife.
(3) Conspiracy to c ommit a crime or misdemeanor, if it has n ot been s uspended or if it has f ailed in effect o nly t hrough
circumstances beyond the control o f its a uthors, is c onsidered t o be the crime o r misdemeanor itself.
(4) A p erson w ho voluntarily withdraws from the conspiracy before any c ommencement of execution benefits f rom
the m itigating e xcuse.
(5) A c onspirator w ho prevents e xecution or who, b efore any a ttempt a t execution, informs the administrative or
judicial authorities of t he conspiracy s hall be e xempt f rom punishment.


CHAPTER VI
COACTION AND C OMPLICITY.
Article 96 — Coaction.
A co-perpetrator i s s omeone who p articipates with another p erson a nd in agreement with them in the commission
of a n offence.
Article 97 — Complicity.
(1) An accomplice t o a n offence c lassified a s a c rime o r m isdemeanour i s:
(a) Whoever in a ny way provokes the o ffence o r gives i nstructions t o commit i t;
(b) Whoever h elps or facilitates t he preparation or commission o f the offense.
(2) Attempted c omplicity i s considered c omplicity itself.
Article 98 — P enalties.
(1) Co-authors and accomplices are l iable to t he same p enalty as the p rincipal a uthor, e xcept i n
cases w here t he l aw provides otherwise.
(2) Personal circumstances w hich result i n exemption f rom l iability, exemption, mitigation or
aggravation o f p unishment have effect only with regard to the p erpetrator or accomplice in w hose
person t hey occur.
(3) Actual c ircumstances o nly h ave a n effect on t he co-author or accomplice if he c ould have foreseen
them.
Article 99 — L iability for f oreseeable c onsequences.
(1) Co-authors and accomplices of a crime or offence o r of an a ttempted c rime or offence a re a lso
liable f or a ny other o ffence the c ommission or attempt o f which is a foreseeable consequence o f the
agreement or c omplicity.
(2) Those w ho, k nowing t he c riminal c onduct of the criminals, h abitually provide t hem with places of
retreat or m eeting s hall a lso b e punished as a ccomplices.
Article 100 — R etention.
(1) A receiver i s a p erson who, a fter the c ommission of a crime or an o ffence, removes the offender or
his a ccomplices from a rrest or search or who h olds or disposes o f things r emoved,
misappropriated or obtained b y means of t he offence.
(2) These p rovisions are n ot a pplicable b etween s pouses.
(3) The penalties f or receiving stolen goods a re provided f or b y s pecial provisions of the law.


TITLE IV
FEDERAL L AWS.
Article 101 — Offenses against f ederal texts.
(1) V iolations o f t he l aws o f t he f ederated States, n ot provided for o r sanctioned by t his c ode or
by o ther federal laws, a re p unishable, if the f ederal l aw expressly decides, b y p enalties equal
to or l ess t han one year o f i mprisonment a nd a f ine o f more t han t wenty-five t housand f rancs
without being a ble t o e xceed f ive hundred thousand f rancs, or by o ne or the other penalty o nly.
(2) V iolations of d ecrees or orders legally issued in e xecution of f ederal laws constitute c ontraventions.
BOOK I I
CRIMES, OFFENCES A ND OFFENCES.
TITLE I
CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST P UBLIC A FFAIRS.
CHAPTER I
ATTACKS O N S TATE SECURITY.
Section I
EXTERNAL SECURITY OF T HE STATE.
Article 102 — H ostilities a gainst the homeland.
Any c itizen who:
(a) P articipates i n hostilities a gainst t he Republic;
(b) P romotes or offers to p romote such h ostilities.
Article 103 — O ther c rimes p unishable by death.
Any citizen i s guilty of t reason a nd punishable b y death, and any f oreigner is guilty o f
espionage a nd also p unishable by death who:
(a) I ncites a foreign power to h ostilities against t he R epublic;
(b) D elivers o r offers t o d eliver to a f oreign p ower o r its agents t roops, t erritories,
installations or equipment assigned t o national d efense o r national d efense
secrets o r secures by any means whatsoever the p ossession of a n ational d efense
secret with a view to d elivering it to a f oreign p ower;


(c) With a view to h arming n ational d efence, d amages buildings, installations or
equipment or practices, either b efore o r a fter t heir completion, d efects l ikely
to prevent t hem from functioning normally or t o cause a n accident.
Article 104 — Common l aw p enalties.
In t he e vent o f a reduction i n t he s entence provided for i n Articles 102 and 1 03, t he
custodial sentence i s i mprisonment.
Article 1 05 — Offences punishable b y a maximum o f ten years.
Anyone who, i n p eacetime:
1. For a p urpose other than d elivering it t o a f oreign power, secures possession
of a n ational d efense secret o r reveals it t o a n u nqualified person;
2. W ith t he intention o f delivering t hem t o a f oreign p ower, g athers
information, objects, documents or processes t he c ollection and e xploitation of
which a re likely t o harm national defense;
3. Enters b y f raudulent means a n installation, v essel, aircraft or vehicle assigned t o
national d efense;
4. Carries o ut drawings, surveys or p hotographic or topographical o perations inside or a round military
installations i n a p rohibited area established by the m ilitary authorities and w ithout their a uthorization;
5. S tays in v iolation of a ban issued b y the competent authority, w ithin a
specified r adius a round a military installation;
6. Flies o ver the t erritory of t he r epublic in a foreign a ircraft w ithout a uthorization;
7. Organizes in a c overt manner a m eans o f correspondence or remote
transmission likely t o h arm national defense;
8. B y a cts not a pproved by the Government e xposes t he Republic to reprisals
9. (L.70.LF – 9 o f M ay 2 0, 1970) E ngages or trains without prior authorization from
authorized Cameroonian a uthorities, in f oreign armed or p olice forces, a nd
engages in a ctivities harmful t o national defense o r a ctivities likely to potentially
expose t he Republic t o r ebellion o r insurrection.
Article 1 06 — O ffences punishable by a m aximum o f five y ears.
Anyone w ho, i n p eacetime:


1. M aintains intelligence w ith agents o f a foreign power that c ould h arm t he m ilitary or
diplomatic situation of t he Republic;
2. R ecruits or e nlists individuals on t he t erritory o f the R epublic and w ithout t he
authorization o f the G overnment for the b enefit o f a foreign armed f orce;
3. E xposes c itizens t o reprisals b y a cts n ot approved b y t he G overnment;
4. W ithout a uthorization f rom the Government, delivers or communicates t o a
foreign p ower or i ts a gents e ither a n i nvention o f i nterest to n ational d efense o r
information, studies or m anufacturing p rocesses r elating t o an i nvention o f this k ind o r
to a n i ndustrial a pplication of i nterest to n ational d efense;
5. T hrough i mprudence; negligence o r failure to c omply with r egulations, a llows t he
removal or k nowledge, i n w hole o r in p art and even t emporarily, of objects,
materials, documents o r information e ntrusted to h im or in h is c ustody a nd k nowledge
of w hich c ould lead t o t he discovery of a n ational d efense s ecret;
6. T hrough i mprudence, n egligence o r failure to comply w ith r egulations, a llows
objects, m aterials or d ocuments entrusted to h im or in h is c are to b e damaged o r
destroyed and t he d eterioration or loss o f w hich i s d etrimental to national d efence;
7. B eing in c harge of supplies, undertakings or management o n b ehalf o f the a rmed
forces or b eing a n agent o f a s upplier or subcontractor causes t he s ervice to b e
missed or d elayed even a s a r esult of simple n egligence;
8. Being in charge o f s upplies, u ndertakings or management on b ehalf of the a rmed f orces, c ommits
fraud o n the n ature, q uality or q uantity of the w orks o r labor o r things s upplied
9. ( L.70 L F 9 M ay 1970)- Enlists o r trains without p rior a uthorization f rom t he
authorized Cameroonian authorities, i n f oreign armed o r police f orces.
Article 107 — N on-denunciation.
Any citizen who, i n peacetime, does n ot n otify the military, a dministrative or judicial a uthorities, a s s oon a s
he becomes aware o f i t, of a ny activity l ikely to h arm n ational defence s hall b e punished b y t he p enalties of
the p receding article.
Article 108 — T ime of w ar.
(1) A ny citizen o r r esident who, i n t ime of w ar and w ithout t he a uthorization o f the c ompetent
authority:
(a) m aintains correspondence o r relations with t he s ubjects or agents o f a n e nemy
power;


(b) Even i ndirectly c arries out an a ct of c ommerce with a s ubject or agent of an e nemy p ower or
with a person r esiding i n i ts territory.
(2) Anyone w ho, in t ime of w ar:
(a) Participates in a n e nterprise to d emoralize t he army or the n ation w ith t he a im of harming national
defense;
(b) Commits one o f t he o ffences referred t o in Articles 1 05, 1 06 or 107.
(3) Anyone w ho, in t ime of w ar, c ommits a ny a ct of a n ature to harm national d efence a nd is not o therwise
punished shall be punished w ith imprisonment of one to five years and a f ine of 50,000 to 5 million f rancs or one
of these t wo p enalties o nly.
(4) (L 70 L F 9 of M ay 2 0, 1 970) - For t he a pplication of paragraphs 2 a nd 3 of this article, a s tate of
emergency or e xception i s c onsidered to b e wartime.
Article 1 09 — D efinition of national defense s ecrets.
Any information of a ny n ature l ikely t o a ssist hostile undertakings against the R epublic and which h as not a lready
been made public s hall be deemed t o b e a n ational d efence s ecret for the a pplication of this code.
Article 1 10 — E xtension to foreign p owers.
The provisions of t his s ection also apply t o a cts c ommitted to the detriment o f foreign p owers to which t hey h ave
been extended by decree.
Section I I
INTERNAL SECURITY OF THE STATE.
Article 1 11 — S ecession.
(1) Anyone w ho, in p eacetime, undertakes by any means w hatsoever to undermine the i ntegrity of the
territory s hall be punished with life i mprisonment.
(2) In times of w ar, s tate of e mergency or exception t he p enalty is death.
Article 1 12 — C ivil War.
Anyone w ho i ncites c ivil war by a rming or inciting i nhabitants to arm t hemselves against each o ther s hall b e
punished.
Article 1 13 (new).- — Propagation of false news
Anyone w ho i ssues o r spreads f alse news w hen s uch news is likely to harm public a uthorities o r national
cohesion s hall b e punished with imprisonment o f 3 m onths to 3 y ears and a f ine of 100,000 t o 2,000,000
francs.


Article 114 ( new).- — Revolution.
Anyone w ho attempts by violence to modify c onstitutional laws or t o o verthrow the p olitical authorities
established b y said laws or to p revent t hem f rom exercising their p owers shall be p unished w ith life imprisonment.
Article 115 ( new).- — Armed band.
(1) Any p erson who, for the purpose of c ommitting o ne o f t he c rimes p rovided f or i n Articles 1 11, 1 12 a nd 1 14
or to prevent t he a ction o f t he p ublic force a gainst the p erpetrators o f t hese c rimes, o rganizes a n a rmed gang o r
exercises any function or command within i t or participates w ith this gang i n t he e xecution or
attempted execution of t hese c rimes shall b e p unished w ith life imprisonment.
(2) Any i ndividual who has o nly participated in t he meeting o f t his group shall be p unished w ith imprisonment of
ten t o twenty y ears.
(3) An armed gang f or the p urposes of t his section i s any g athering of a t least f ive persons, one o f w hom i s
carrying a n open o r concealed w eapon.
(4) The p rovisions o f A rticle 95 ( 5) o f t his Code s hall apply to t his Article.
Article 116 ( new).- — Insurrection.
Anyone w ho, in a n i nsurrectional movement,
:
(a) Provokes o r facilitates t he g athering of i nsurgents b y a ny means;
(b) Prevents by any m eans whatsoever the c onvening, a ssembly or e xercise of p ublic force o r s eizes it;
(c) Invades o r destroys public o r private buildings;
(d) Possesses or seizes w eapons, ammunition o r e xplosives;
e) W ears a u niform, costume, or other official insignia, whether c ivil o r m ilitary.
Article 117 — D efinition of w eapons.
Apart f rom w eapons t hemselves, a ll objects carried with the i ntention o f using t hem t o c ause b odily injury o r
material damage are considered w eapons for the p urposes of t his article.
Section I II
ACCESSORY PENALTIES.
Article 118 — S pecial confiscation.


In the event of conviction f or one of the crimes o r o ffences p rovided f or in this chapter,
the c onfiscation prescribed by A rticle 35 o f this Code is pronounced and m ay be extended e ven to
property not b elonging t o the convicted person.
Article 1 19 — confiscation o f i llegitimate p roperty.
(1) In t he e vent of conviction for o ne of the c rimes or o ffences p rovided f or in t his chapter,
the court m ay order the confiscation of the c onvicted p erson's property of w hatever nature,
divided o r u ndivided, t he legitimate origin o f w hich c annot be established.
(2) In t imes o f war t his c onfiscation is a lways p ronounced.
Article 1 20 — General confiscation.
In the event of conviction f or one of the crimes p rovided f or in t his chapter, the court m ay also
order t he t otal o r partial c onfiscation of legitimately acquired p roperty.
Article 1 21 — Forfeitures.
(1) I n the event o f conviction f or a c rime p rovided f or in this chapter, t he d uration o f the
disqualifications l isted i n Article 3 0 m ay n ot b e reduced t o less than five y ears.
(2) In t he e vent of a conviction t o a c ustodial s entence for an offence, imposed p ursuant
to t his chapter, t he court may add these forfeitures f or a p eriod of a t l east f ive years and a t m ost
ten y ears.
(3) The post-criminal m easures p rovided f or in Article 4 0 may be extended t o t en years.
(4) In t he e vent of a crime or offence committed by a civil servant, by an agent o r e mployee
of a public service o r by a military personnel, t he ban o n exercising a public f unction m ay be
perpetual.
CHAPTER II
VIOLATIONS ON THE CONSTITUTION.
Section I
ELECTORAL CRIMES.
Article 1 22 — Electoral fraud.
(1) A nyone w ho, during a f ederal, f ederated o r m unicipal election:
(a) Violates the s ecrecy o f t he vote;
b) H arms h is sincerity


(c) Prevents v oting operations;
d) Modifies t he result;
(2) Anyone w ho, t hrough simple v oluntary f ailure t o c omply with legal o r regulatory
provisions, unintentionally causes the s ame r esult, shall b e p unished w ith detention
for o ne month o r o ne year and a f ine of 5,000 t o 5 0,000 f rancs o r one o f t hese two p enalties o nly.
(3) Public a ction i s time-barred a fter four m onths from the date of t he offence or f rom the day
of t he l ast act o f p rosecution or i nvestigation.
Article 123 — C orruption and violence.
(1) Anyone who:
(a) By t he granting or p romise of a particular advantage of a ny kind, or
(b) By m eans o f violence or threat of a ny p articular h arm, influences t he vote of an elector or
determines him to a bstain.
(2) W hen t he v ote influenced is that o f an e lectoral c ollege o r a f raction o f this c ollege,
the m inimum p enalty of d etention i s six months, and that of the fine is 2 0,000 f rancs.
Section II
COALITION.
Article 124 — Against the laws, t he functioning o f a service and t he security o f t he State.
(1) Any i ndividual h olding a ny p art of p ublic authority and a ny official who, w ith other officials or o fficials, consults
or d eliberates shall be p unished w ith i mprisonment of s ix months t o t hree years:
(a) M easures contrary t o laws or legally a dopted i mplementing t exts;
(b) Measures, i ncluding c ollective resignations, w hose p rincipal purpose is to
prevent or suspend the p erformance of a p ublic service.
(2) If t his c oncert takes p lace b etween c ivil a nd m ilitary authorities, imprisonment is o ne t o t en
years.
(3) If t he c oncert referred to in p aragraph 2 above has as its o bject a crime a gainst State
Security, t he p enalty i s d eath.
Section III
EMPIETEMENTS.


Article 125 — O n t he legislative.
Any c ivil servant who:
(a) I nterferes with the e xercise of legislative power;
(b) Refuses to implement l egislative provisions.
Article 126 — O f t he e xecutive and the j udiciary.
The following shall b e punished by i mprisonment o f s ix m onths to five years:
(a) The r epresentative of the e xecutive a uthority w ho i ssues o rders o r defenses to courts
or tribunals;
(b) T he magistrate who issues orders o r d efenses to e xecutive o r a dministrative a uthorities.
Article 127 — J udiciary on c ertain immunities.
Any m agistrate or judicial p olice o fficer who, contrary to the l aws on i mmunities, pursues, a rrests or j udges a
member of the federal or federated Governments o r o f the f ederal or f ederated assemblies, shall be
punished by i mprisonment of o ne t o f ive y ears.
Section I V
IRREGULAR USE OF P UBLIC F ORCE.
Article 128 — U nlawful use of f orce.
Anyone w ho r equests or orders t he a ction o r u se of public force a gainst the e xecution o f a legislative o r
regulatory provision o r a l egitimate o rder f rom either the c ourts or the a dministration s hall b e punished by
imprisonment of t hree t o t en y ears and a f ine of 20,000 t o 200,000 francs.
Article 129 — Failure t o c omply with a r equisition.
Any c ommander o f the p ublic f orce w ho f ails to comply with a l egal requisition f rom t he civil authority
shall b e p unished w ith i mprisonment of six m onths to t wo years.
Section V
ACCESSORY P ENALTIES.
Article 130 — F orfeitures.
In t he event o f conviction for one o f t he offences provided f or i n t his chapter, the court m ay order
the forfeitures referred t o in A rticle 3 0 of this Code for a p eriod o f f ive to ten years.
CHAPTER III


IN T HE EXERCISE OF THEIR D UTIES.
Section I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS.
Article 1 31 — (L.. n °77/23 of D ecember 6 , 1977). Definition of c ivil servant.
For the a pplication of a ny criminal l aw, a ny magistrate, a ny p ublic or m inisterial officer, a ny employee o r c lerk o f
the S tate or a ny o ther legal entity u nder public law, of a S tate o r mixed economy company, o f a p ublic or m inisterial
officer, any m ember o f t he armed forces o r t he gendarmerie, any a gent of national security o r t he p rison
administration a nd a ny person c harged, even o ccasionally, with a s ervice, a m ission o r a p ublic mandate,
acting i n the e xercise o r o n the o ccasion of t he exercise of his functions, s hall be considered a c ivil servant.
Article 1 32 — Aggravation f or c ivil servants.
(1) Subject to m ore s evere penalties w here a pplicable, any o fficial g uilty o f violence against a nother person shall
be punished by imprisonment of s ix months to f ive y ears.
(2) The penalties provided f or in A rticles 189 ( copying of administrative d ocuments); 206 (documents, etc.), 207
(official c ertificates), 291 ( 1) (illegal arrest); 292 (forced labor), 2 99 (violation of domicile), 300 (violation
of c orrespondence), 310 ( professional s ecrecy), 315 (forgery o f certificate) are d oubled w hen t he g uilty p arty
is a civil s ervant.
Article 1 32 bis — (Law N o. 9 7/009 o f J anuary 10, 1 997) Torture.
(1) Anyone who, by t orture, i nvoluntarily causes the d eath of another person shall be punished w ith life
imprisonment.
(2) The penalty i s imprisonment of ten ( 10) t o t wenty (20) years, when t he t orture c auses the v ictim t o permanently
lose the u se of a ll or p art o f a l imb, o rgan or
sense.
(3) The penalty i s imprisonment of five ( 5) years to ten ( 10) years and a f ine of 100,000 t o 1,000,000 f rancs when
the t orture c auses t he victim i llness o r incapacity t o work f or more than thirty (30) days.
(4) The penalty i s imprisonment of t wo ( 2) to f ive ( 5) years a nd a f ine o f 50,000 t o 200,000 f rancs, when t he t orture
causes t he v ictim either illness o r i ncapacity to work o f thirty (30) days or l ess, o r m ental o r m oral p ain o r suffering.
(5) For t he p urposes of t his Article:
(a) The t erm “ torture” m eans any act by w hich severe pain o r suffering, w hether physical, mental o r
moral, i s intentionally i nflicted o n a p erson b y o r a t the i nstigation of or with the c onsent or
acquiescence of a p ublic o fficial or o ther p erson acting in an official c apacity, for such purposes as:


to o btain f rom h er or a third person i nformation o r confessions, t o punish her for a n a ct t hat s he o r a
third p erson h as committed, or is s uspected of having committed, t o intimidate o r put pressure o n h er
or a third person, o r for a ny other r eason based o n a ny f orm of discrimination w hatsoever
(b) The t erm “ torture” so defined d oes not include p ain or suffering a rising from, i nherent in or incidental
to l awful s anctions.
(c) No e xceptional circumstances w hatsoever, whether a s tate o f w ar o r threat of w ar, internal
political i nstability o r any other p ublic e mergency, may b e i nvoked as a j ustification f or t orture.
(d) An o rder f rom a superior o fficer or a p ublic authority m ay n ot be i nvoked t o justify torture.
The conditions provided f or i n paragraph 1 of A rticle 10 o f this Code a re not applicable to t he
torture.
Article 133 — ( Law N o. 9 3/013 of D ecember 2 2, 1993) Forfeitures, c onfiscation and publicity.
(1) The forfeitures of office under A rticle 30 o f this C ode may b e i mposed o n o fficials g uilty o f the
offences provided f or in t his chapter o r convicted under Article 8 9 o f this Code.
However, in t he c ase of Articles 134, 1 34 bis, 1 35, 1 36 a nd 1 61 o f this Code, t he forfeitures o f A rticle
30 a re compulsorily pronounced.
(2) In t he e vent of conviction f or t he offences provided for i n Articles 1 34, 134 b is, 1 35, 136 a nd 1 61 o f this Code,
the c ourt i s required t o order t he confiscation p rovided for i n Article 3 5 a nd t o order t he publication o f i ts decision
in t he written press, r adio or television.
Section II
ILLEGITIMATE ADVANTAGES.
Article 134 — ( Law N o. 7 7/23 o f D ecember 6, 1 977) Corruption.
(1) Any civil servant o r public a gent w ho, for h imself or for a t hird party, solicits, a ccepts or receives offers,
promises, gifts o r presents t o perform, r efrain f rom performing or postpone a n a ct of his f unction shall be
punished by imprisonment of five t o t en years and a f ine o f 200,000 t o 2,000,000 francs.
(2) Imprisonment is f rom 1 to 5 y ears and t he fine f rom 100,000 t o 1,000,000 francs i f the act did not fall w ithin
the r esponsibilities of the corrupt p erson, b ut w as n evertheless facilitated by h is p osition.


(3) Any civil s ervant or p ublic a gent w ho requests or accepts p ayment i n c ash o r in k ind f or h imself or for a t hird
party, a s remuneration f or an a ct a lready p erformed or a p ast a bstention, s hall b e p unished by the penalties
provided for i n paragraph 2 above.
Article 134 b is — (1) Whoever, in o rder to o btain either t he performance, postponement o r abstention o f a n
act, o r o ne o f the favors o r advantages seen in the preceding article, makes p romises, o ffers, g ifts, p resents
or g ives i n to solicitations t ending t owards c orruption, shall b e p unished by the penalties provided for i n A rticle
134, p aragraph 1 , a bove, w hether or n ot t he c orruption has produced i ts effect.
(2) Anyone w ho m akes donations, p resents or gives in t o s olicitations i ntended t o r emunerate a n a ct
already p erformed o r a past a bstention shall b e p unished b y t he penalties p rovided for i n p aragraph
2 o f t he p receding a rticle.
Article 135 — ( L n°77/23 o f D ecember 6, 1 977). Interest in an a ct.
(1) Any civil s ervant or p ublic a gent w ho, directly or indirectly, takes or receives a n i nterest shall b e p unished by
imprisonment of one t o f ive y ears and a fine o f 200,000 to 2 ,000,000 f rancs:
(a) in acts or a wards s ubmitted t o h is n otice o r over which he h ad supervision, control, administration or
award;
(b) in p rivate companies, c ooperatives, mixed economy companies o r State financial p articipation,
public authorities, c oncessions subject t o i ts supervision o r control;
(c) i n markets o r c ontracts entered i nto on b ehalf of the State or a p ublic authority, w ith a n atural or legal
person;
(d) in a matter for which h e i s r esponsible for o rdering p ayment or carrying out liquidation.
(2) The provisions o f t his article a re applicable t o f ormer civil s ervants a s defined i n A rticle 1 31 of t his Code
who, within f ive y ears of t he c essation of t heir d uties as a r esult o f r esignation, dismissal, leave, availability or
retirement, or f or any o ther reason, t ake any i nterest i n the acts, o perations or enterprises referred t o a bove and
previously subject to t heir s upervision, control, a dministration o r for w hich they e nsured t he payment o r liquidation.
Article 136 — P articipation i n a case.
(1) Any civil s ervant who, b y virtue o f his d uties, i s r esponsible f or t he supervision o f a ny company, authority
or c oncession, o r f or expressing opinions on t heir a ctivities, c ollaborates or participates i n a ny way w hatsoever i n
their financing o r a ctivity, s hall b e p unished by imprisonment of s ix months to two years a nd a f ine of 20,000
to 2 million francs.
(2) The same a ctions committed w ithin f ive y ears of t he cessation o f said f unctions shall b e p unishable b y the
same p enalties, unless the c apital received a s hereditary d evolution i s i nvolved.


Section I II
OFFENSE AGAINST THE P UBLIC INTEREST.
Article 137 — C oncussion.
Any o fficial w ho grants e xemptions from d uties, t axes, royalties, levies or c ontributions, or d elivers at a price
lower t han t hat prescribed, p roducts of the federal or f ederated S tate, o f a cooperative, a community o r
establishment, or public or subject to the administrative s upervision of t he S tate, or o f w hich the S tate d irectly or
indirectly holds the majority o f the capital, shall b e punished with i mprisonment of t wo to t en y ears and a fine of
20,000 t o 2 million f rancs.
Article 138 — U nreported deficit.
Any c ivil servant who, having k nowledge o f a c ash d eficit or a n accounting d eficit in t he m anagement o f a
public a gent u nder his o rders or supervision, does n ot r eport it to t he n earest j udicial authority o r t o h is
hierarchical s uperior shall b e punished w ith i mprisonment of o ne to f ive years.
Article 139 — N egligence of t he g uardian.
The n egligent g uardian is p unished:
(1) I n t he event o f destruction, damage or r emoval o f t he p roperty r eferred to i n A rticle 1 87, imprisonment of
one month to o ne year a nd a f ine of 10,000 t o 50,000 francs;
(2) I n t he event o f theft, r emoval or destruction provided f or in A rticle 1 88, imprisonment of t hree
months to o ne year a nd a f ine of 10,000 t o 50,000 francs;
(3) I n t he event o f breaking o f seals as p rovided for in A rticle 1 91, imprisonment of t wo months t o two years;
(4) I n t he event o f escape o r release as p rovided for in A rticle 1 93, imprisonment of two months t o t wo years.
Section I V
OFFENSES AGAINST THE I NTERESTS O F INDIVIDUALS.
Article 140 — A buse o f o ffice.
(1) A ny c ivil servant who abuses h is o r her f unctions to i nfringe p rivate rights or i nterests s hall be p unished by
imprisonment of three m onths to one year a nd a fine of 5 ,000 to 5 0,000 francs or o ne o f these t wo penalties only.
(2) I f the offence is c ommitted with t he aim of obtaining a ny advantage for oneself or f or another, t he p enalty i s
imprisonment from t hree m onths t o three years a nd the f ine from 50,000 to 1 million f rancs.


Article 1 41 — Violations of c ivil rights.
Any o fficial who prevents a citizen f rom exercising h is electoral r ights or d eprives h im of t he exercise or
enjoyment of the r ights mentioned i n Article 3 0 ( 1), ( 2), (4) o r ( 5) s hall be p unished with i mprisonment of
one t o five y ears.
Article 1 42 — Concussion.
Any c ivil servant, n otary, a uctioneer, bailiff o r enforcement agent a nd t heir a gents who d emand duties, t axes,
fees, l evies o r c ontributions w hich are not d ue or m aterial b enefits without p aying t he fair price s hall b e p unished
by i mprisonment of two to ten y ears a nd a fine of 20,000 t o 2 million f rancs.
Article 1 43 — Favoritism.
(1) Any official who decides b y f avour or enmity against one o f t he parties s hall be p unished with i mprisonment of
one t o five y ears.
(2) If t his o fficial is a magistrate, a federal inspector or a prefect, t he penalty i s d oubled.
Article 1 44 — Forgery of a n a ct.
Any c ivil servant, n otary, a uctioneer, bailiff o r enforcement agent w ho forges or a lters, e ither i n substance or i n the
signatures, dates a nd certificates, a deed o r w riting which he i s r equired t o d raw u p, receive, record o r notify
shall b e p unished with imprisonment of ten t o twenty years.
Section V
GUILTY ABSTENTIONS.
Article 1 45 — T olerance o f a gathering.
Any official who, h aving the p ower, d uty and possibility t o d isperse a gathering a s defined in Article 232, fails t o d o
so s hall b e p unished w ith imprisonment o f three months to t wo y ears.
Article 1 46 — T olerance o f an a ttack on i ndividual rights.
Any o fficial who, h aving the p ower, duty and possibility t o p revent them, t olerates either v iolence a gainst p ersons
or a cts that i nfringe on i ndividual freedom o r c ivil r ights as defined i n Article 141 i s p unished as an a ccomplice.
Article 1 47 — Denial of justice.
Any j udge w ho r efuses, after h aving been duly requested to d o s o, t o r ender a d ecision shall be p unished
with i mprisonment of three m onths t o two y ears.
Article 1 48 — Refusal o f a service d ue.


Any civil s ervant, notary, auctioneer, b ailiff or enforcement agent w ho, b eing l egally required to perform
a duty o f his o ffice, f ails t o d o s o s hall b e p unished w ith imprisonment of three months t o t wo years.
Article 149 — Failure t o c omply with m arriage f ormalities.
(1) Any c ivil r egistrar w ho draws u p a m arriage c ertificate s hall be p unished b y imprisonment of t hree months
to one y ear a nd a f ine o f 5 ,000 t o 70,000 f rancs:
(a) Without e nsuring that t he c onsents necessary f or i ts validity h ave b een g ranted;
b) W ithout observing any period o f widowhood t hat m ay have b een prescribed.
(2) The o ffence is punishable r egardless of t he civil c onsequences o f t he i rregularity.
Article 150 — C ivil status registers.
Any civil r egistrar w ho registers his acts elsewhere t han i n the r egisters i ntended for t his purpose or w ho f ails
to register t hem shall be p unished b y imprisonment of o ne t o t hree months a nd a fine o f 2 ,000 t o 4 0,000 f rancs.
Article 151 — S ystematic negligence.
(1) Any c ivil s ervant who, through n egligence o r s ystematic obstruction, causes p ostponements, delays or d isorders
or systematically refrains f rom c arrying out a ny a ct of h is function s hall be p unished b y i mprisonment of
one t o three m onths a nd a fine o f 2 ,000 to 2 5,000 f rancs.
(2) Prosecution m ay o nly be i nitiated upon prior c omplaint from the M inister o r S ecretary o f S tate concerned.
CHAPTER IV
ATTACKS ON P UBLIC A UTHORITY.
Section I
OUTRAGES AND V IOLENCE.
Article 152 — D efinition o f c ontempt.
(1) Defamation; i nsult o r threat m ade either b y gestures, words, or s houts u ttered in places o pen t o the p ublic,
or by a ny p rocess intended t o reach t he p ublic a re qualified a s insults.
(2) The e xceptions provided for i n article 3 06 apply to c ontempt.
(3) Public action i s t ime-barred after f our m onths from the d ate o f t he o ffence o r f rom the d ay o f t he l ast act o f
prosecution or investigation.


Article 153 — C ontempt o f the President o f the Republic and other p ersonalities.
(1) A nyone who insults: the P resident of the R epublic, the Vice-President of t he Republic, t he person e xercising all
or p art of h is prerogatives o r a foreign h ead o f s tate s hall be punished b y imprisonment o f one to five
years a nd a fine of 20,000 to 2 0 million francs o r one of these two p enalties o nly.
(2) A nyone who insults heads of f oreign governments, f oreign m inisters of f oreign g overnments a nd diplomatic
agents a ccredited to the G overnment o f t he R epublic s hall be punished w ith detention for s ix months to t wo y ears
and a fine o f 2 0,000 t o 20 million francs o r one of these two p enalties only.
(3) The truth o f t he d efamatory fact m ay n ot be reported under any c ircumstances.
Article 154 — ( Ln° 90/61 of 19 Dec. 1990). Insults t o constituted bodies and civil servants.
Anyone w ho commits a n insult w ithout being able t o r eport, in t he case o f d efamation, the truth o f the delaying act
shall be p unished by i mprisonment of 3 months t o 3 y ears and a f ine of 1 00,000 to 2 ,000,000 f rancs or o ne of
the p enalties only:
(a) C ourts and tribunals, armed f orces, constituted b odies a nd public administrations;
(b) B y reason of t heir functions or their position, a member of t he government or o f t he national a ssembly
or a civil s ervant.
Article 155 — N on-publicity.
In t he e vent that t he d efamation, i nsult and t hreat referred t o in A rticles 153 and 154 were not public, the
penalty of d etention or imprisonment is reduced by half a s i s the fine.
Article 156 — V iolence against o fficials.
(1) A nyone who commits v iolence or assault against a civil s ervant shall be punished b y imprisonment of one to
three years a nd a fine o f 5 ,000 to 100,000 francs.
(2) T he penalty is i mprisonment of f ive to ten y ears a nd a fine o f 20,000 t o 5 00,000 f rancs if t he violence and
assault a re p remeditated or if t hey cause, e ven u nintentionally, injuries a s p rovided f or i n A rticles 2 77 and
280 of t his Code.
(3) T he court may i n a ll c ases p ronounce t he f orfeitures of A rticle 3 0 of t his C ode.
(4) I f the v iolence a nd a ssault u nintentionally r esult in d eath, the penalty i s life imprisonment.
(5) I f the v iolence a nd a ssault a re committed w ith t he intention o f causing d eath, the guilty party shall be
punished by d eath.


Section II
REBELLION.
Article 1 57 — ( L. n° 90-061 of 1 9 Dec. 1 990) R ebellion.
(1) Anyone who:
(a) By a ny m eans whatsoever, i ncites resistance to the a pplication o f laws, regulations
or l egitimate orders of public authority;
(b) By violence or assault, p revents a nyone a cting f or t he execution of l aws, regulations
or l egitimate orders of p ublic authority.
(2) I n t he case referred t o in p aragraph 1 (b) a bove, the p enalty i s 1 to 5 years of i mprisonment if the
perpetrator or o ne o f the perpetrators is a rmed.
Article 1 58 — I n group.
(1) In t he e vent t hat the o ffence p rovided for in the preceding article i s committed b y a t
least five persons, t he p enalty shall b e one t o t hree y ears' i mprisonment a nd five t o
fifteen years' imprisonment if t wo of them c arry conspicuous weapons.
(2) Against a ny co-author w ho c arries weapons, even h idden o nes, the penalty i s f ive to fifteen
years o f i mprisonment.
Article 1 59 — R epealed (Ln° 9 0-061 of 19 D ec. 1 990 a mended Ln° 9 1-007 of 30 J ul. 1991)
[Political c haracter.
In the c ases r eferred to i n Articles 1 57 and 1 58, d etention s hall be substituted f or i mprisonment if
the p olitical n ature o f t he o ffence i s established.]
Section III
INFLUENCE AND F RAUD.
Article 1 60 — C oercion o f a civil s ervant.
Anyone who, by a ssault o r threats, forces a civil s ervant to c ommit a n i rregular act o r omission
shall be p unished with imprisonment o f two t o t en years a nd a fine of 2 0,000 to 1 million
francs.
Article 161 — ( Law N o. 77-23 of 6 December 1977) Influence peddling.
(1) Anyone who, by m eans o f acts o f violence, threats, gifts or promises, c orrupts a person having
real or s upposed influence to o btain any advantage f rom the public a uthority s hall be
punished by t he p enalties of A rticle 1 60.


(2) Any civil s ervant who, f or himself o r for a nother, solicits, a ccepts o r r eceives offers,
promises or gifts to obtain a ny a dvantage g ranted by t he p ublic authority or b y a b ody
under the c ontrol of the p ublic authority o r b y a b ody under the c ontrol of t he p ublic authority,
contracts, companies o r o ther b enefits resulting f rom a greements c oncluded w ith t he p ublic
authority or a b ody u nder the c ontrol o f t he public authority, thereby a busing the r eal o r
supposed influence g iven t o him by his position or m andate, s hall b e p unished w ith t he same
penalties.
Article 162 — F alse s tatements.
(1) Anyone w ho i nfluences the conduct o f a c ivil s ervant b y making false s tatements shall be p unished w ith
imprisonment of f ifteen days t o t hree m onths and a fine o f 5 ,000 t o 50,000 f rancs.
(2) If i t is a d eclaration made o n the occasion of a b irth, m arriage or d eath certificate, the
prison s entence is t hree m onths to three y ears.
(3) In c ase o f f alse s tatements m ade under o ath, the p enalty is i mprisonment
of o ne t o f ive y ears.
(4) The penalty is one t o five years' i mprisonment for anyone w ho, by any means whatsoever, c auses a
conviction to b e entered in the criminal r ecord o f a third party other than the convicted p erson.
(5) The penalty is o ne m onth t o one y ear o f i mprisonment f or a nyone who, by a ny m eans
whatsoever, obtains an extract f rom t he c riminal r ecord o f a t hird p arty unduly.
Article 163 — E xamination f raud.
Anyone w ho commits fraud i n e xaminations o r c ompetitive examinations w ith t he a im o f
obtaining e ntry i nto a public service o r a d iploma, certificate or t itle i ssued by t he S tate or
a n ational or foreign p ublic s ervice shall b e p unished b y i mprisonment of o ne month to
three years and a fine o f 25,000 t o 2 million f rancs or o ne of t hese two p enalties only.
Section I V
FRAUD IN JUSTICE.
Article 164 — F alse t estimony.
(1) Anyone who in a p rocedure g ives false t estimony likely t o i nfluence the d ecision and whose
testimony has become irrevocable i s p unished:
(a) When the p rocedure i s a n investigation t erminated b y a d ecision of d ismissal,
imprisonment of three m onths t o o ne year a nd a f ine of 5 ,000 to 5 0,000 f rancs;
(b) When t he false t estimony is g iven b efore a c ourt ruling on c riminal m atters:


- I n the e vent o f a contravention, imprisonment o f six m onths to three years and a fine o f 5,000
to 100,000 francs;
- I n the e vent o f a n o ffense, imprisonment of one t o five y ears and a fine of 10,000 t o 500,000 f rancs;
- I n the e vent o f a crime, i mprisonment of five t o ten years and a fine of 50,000 t o 2 million f rancs;
- I n the c ase o f a crime p unishable b y death, l ife imprisonment.
(c) When t he f alse t estimony is g iven b efore any o ther jurisdiction, i mprisonment of one
to five years and a fine of 1 0,000 t o 5 00,000 f rancs.
(2) If t he f alse witness has received gifts or accepted p romises, the penalties o f limited duration a s well a s the fine
are doubled and the c onfiscation of t he gifts is o bligatory.
(3) A court interpreter who distorts t he s ubstance o f the words o r w ritings he is responsible f or t ranslating i s
punished l ike a false witness.
Article 165 — F alse expertise.
Any expert w itness who f iles a false report w hich h as become irrevocable shall b e p unished by t he penalties set o ut in
Article 164 ( 2).
Article 166 — P erjury.
Any party to whom t he o ath, h aving b een submitted o r r eferred t o in a non-criminal matter, i s forged shall be
punished b y i mprisonment of o ne to f ive years and a fine o f 10,000 t o 500,000 francs.
oath.
Article 167 — C oncealment o f a procedure.
Any party who, by o ne of t he means p rovided f or in A rticle 3 18 (1) ( c), k eeps h is o pponent in ignorance o f
legal p roceedings brought against h im s hall be punished by imprisonment of three months to two y ears
and a f ine of 20,000 t o 1 million francs or one o f these two p enalties o nly.
Article 168 — S uppression a nd fabrication o f e vidence.
(1) Anyone who, w ith the aim o f i nfluencing a judicial procedure:
(a) Suppresses material evidence o r prevents a witness f rom appearing;
(b) Fabricates or uses false m aterial evidence o r m isleads a witness.
(2) Anyone who obtains from anyone a promise n ot to report a crime o r a n offence o r n ot to testify shall be
punished w ith t he s ame penalties.


However, o btaining t his promise f rom the v ictim o r their legal r epresentative without u sing t he
means provided for in A rticle 1 61 i s not p unishable i n t he e vent o f a n o ffence.
Article 169 — (Ln° 9 3-013 of 2 2 Dec. 1993) Biased comments.
(1) Anyone w ho publicly r eports o n a j udicial procedure that h as not b een finally judged i n s uch
conditions t hat h e influences, even unintentionally, the o pinion of o thers a gainst one of t he
parties s hall b e punished b y i mprisonment of f ifteen d ays t o t hree m onths and a fine of 1 0,000 t o
100,000 f rancs.
(2) T his section does not apply t o reports o f a p ublic hearing m ade in g ood f aith.
(3) When the offence is c ommitted through t he p ress o r radio, t he p enalty is t hree m onths to t wo
years' i mprisonment and the f ine is 1 00,000 t o 5 million f rancs.
Article 170 — Forfeitures.
Individuals c onvicted u nder this s ection are liable to t he f orfeitures o f A rticle 3 0 o f t his Code.
Section V
REFUSAL TO ASSIST JUSTICE.
Article 171 — Non i ntervention.
Anyone w ho, while a ble t o prevent b y immediate a ction, without r isk t o t hemselves o r t o t hird
parties, t he commission o f any crime or o ffence against the b odily integrity o f a person, refrains
from d oing s o, s hall b e punished by i mprisonment of o ne month t o t hree years a nd a fine of
20,000 t o 1 m illion francs o r one of t hese t wo penalties only.
Article 172 — Refusal t o e xonerate.
Anyone w ho, without accusing themselves or their spouse, a scendants o r descendants, c an
provide t he judicial or p olice authorities with proof of t he i nnocence of a person i mprisoned on
remand or c onvicted, e ven if not d efinitively, of a crime o r offence, but f ails to d o s o, shall b e
punished b y imprisonment of one month t o t hree years a nd a fine of 2 0,000 t o 1 million
francs, o r b y o ne o f these two penalties o nly.
Article 173 — D efaulting witness.
(1) Any p erson d uly summoned to court t o b e h eard as a witness who, e xcept in t he c ase o f
legitimate excuse, d oes not a ppear or refuses t o t ake the o ath or g ive e vidence shall b e
punished w ith imprisonment of s ix days t o t hree months and a fine of 1 ,000 to 5 0,000 f rancs.
(2) Anyone w ho, having publicly denounced a crime or offence a nd publicly declared that he
knows the p erpetrators or accomplices, refuses to a nswer questions put i n t his regard by
the c ompetent Magistrate o r evades t hem shall be p unished w ith i mprisonment o f s ix d ays t o
one year and a f ine of 20,000 t o 4 00,000 francs or o ne of t hese t wo penalties o nly.


Article 174 — Defaulting R equirement.
Anyone w ho, b eing regularly required as an expert, d octor o r i nterpreter, refuses
without l egitimate reason to a ssist the j udicial authority s hall b e punished with a fine o f
20,000 t o 500,000.
Article 175 — D efaulting assessor o r j uror.
Any assessor o r j uror who, except i n c ases o f l egitimate excuse, does not r espond to the c alling of his name
or refuses to take the o ath required by law or w ithdraws b efore t he e xpiry of his duties s hall b e p unished with
imprisonment of s ix days to t hree months a nd a f ine o f 5,000 to 50,000 f rancs.
Article 176 — F alse e xcuses.
Persons referred t o i n A rticles 1 73, 1 74 and 175 who a llege a f alse e xcuse shall b e punished
with i mprisonment of o ne to t hree m onths.
Section VI
NON-OBSERVANCE OF C ERTAIN COURT DECISIONS.
Article 1 77 — P rohibition of residence.
Anyone w ho appears in a p lace forbidden t o him o r w ho l eaves a place assigned t o him pursuant t o Article
42 o f t his C ode shall b e p unished with i mprisonment of one month t o one year.
Article 178 — Other penalties and m easures.
Anyone w ho:
(a) Exercises a p rofession w hich i s p rohibited u nder Article 36 o f t his
Code ;
(b) R eopens an e stablishment c losed pursuant to Article 34 o f this Code;
(c) S ubject to the p rovisions o f the p receding a rticle, i nfringes o ne of t he f orfeitures
or o bligations imposed on him p ursuant t o a rticles 3 1, 4 1, o r 4 2 o f t his Code.
Article 179 — C ustody of a minor.
(1) Anyone w ho does n ot represent a minor to t he person t o w hom c ustody h as been entrusted by a
court d ecision, even a provisional o ne, shall b e punished by imprisonment of o ne m onth to o ne
year a nd a fine of 5,000 t o 1 m illion francs.
(2) I f the g uilty party h as been d eprived o f parental a uthority, the p rison s entence is i ncreased t o three y ears.


Article 180 — A limony.
(1) Anyone who has failed to p rovide t he f ull pension that h e has been o rdered t o pay to his s pouse, ascendants
or d escendants f or more t han two months s hall be punished with i mprisonment of one m onth t o one y ear and a
fine of 20,000 t o 4 00,000 francs o r one o f t hese t wo p enalties o nly.
(2) Failure t o pay i s p resumed to b e v oluntary unless p roven o therwise, b ut insolvency resulting from h abitual
misconduct, particularly drunkenness, is i n n o c ase a valid excuse f or t he debtor.
Article 181 — Organized insolvency.
Anyone w ho, a fter a court decision, e ven if n ot final, i mposing a financial sentence, organises his i nsolvency s hall
be p unished w ith i mprisonment of o ne to f ive years.
Article 182 — Repossession o f r eal estate.
Anyone w ho, w ithin three months o f t heir e viction o r v oluntary departure, r eoccupies a building t o the detriment
of the p erson t o whom it w as a llocated by court o rder shall be punished with imprisonment of fifteen days t o six
months.
Section V II
OBSTRUCTION OF T HE E XERCISE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
Article 183 — Refusal o f t ax.
(1) Anyone w ho organizes by any m eans w hatsoever the collective refusal of tax s hall be punished by
imprisonment of t hree months t o t wo years and a fine o f 200,000 to 2 million f rancs.
(2) Anyone w ho incites t he p ublic t o r efuse or d elay the payment of tax s hall be punished by i mprisonment of six
months to one year a nd a fine o f 5 0,000 t o 1 million f rancs.
Article 184 — Embezzlement.
(1) Whoever by a ny means whatsoever fraudulently obtains o r r etains any property whatsoever, movable o r
immovable, b elonging to, i ntended for or e ntrusted to the federal o r f ederated S tate, t o a cooperative, community
or e stablishment, o r public o r subject to t he a dministrative s upervision of the State or o f which t he State directly o r
indirectly holds t he m ajority of t he capital, i s p unished:
(a) If t he value o f s uch property exceeds 5 00,000 francs, life imprisonment;
b) I f t his v alue i s g reater than 100,000 francs and less than o r e qual to 500,000 francs, imprisonment
of fifteen to t wenty years;
(c) If t his v alue is e qual t o o r l ess than 1 00,000 francs, imprisonment of five t o ten
years a nd a fine o f 5 0,000 t o 5 00,000 francs.


(2) The penalties laid d own a bove may n ot b e reduced by t he a dmission of mitigating c ircumstances to less
than t en, f ive o r t wo y ears r espectively a nd a s uspended s entence m ay n ot b e granted under any
circumstances.
(3) In t he c ases provided for in A rticle 8 7 (2) of this C ode, the m inimum s entence is respectively five
years, two y ears and o ne y ear a nd a s uspended s entence cannot be granted except in the c ase of mitigating
grounds o f m inority.
(4) The confiscation provided f or in A rticle 3 5 of this C ode i s obligatorily p ronounced as well as t he f orfeitures o f
Article 3 0 for a t l east five y ears and a t most ten y ears.
(5) Publication o f t he decision m ust be ordered.
(6) This article d oes n ot a pply t o t he misappropriation a nd concealment o f military e ffects referred to in the c odes
of m ilitary justice.
Article 1 85 — Disturbances in t he service.
Anyone w ho disrupts the o peration of a p ublic service to which he is not a p arty shall be punished w ith
imprisonment of s ix days to one m onth or a f ine o f 1,000 to 50,000 f rancs.
Article 1 86 — O pposition to w orks.
Anyone who, b y threats o r assault, o pposes the e xecution o f work r egularly o rdered or a uthorized b y t he p ublic
authority o r destroys, removes or m oves a b oundary m arker demarcating such work s hall b e punished by
imprisonment of t hree to two y ears a nd a f ine o f 10,000 t o 50,000 f rancs.
Article 1 87 — Damage t o p ublic o r classified property.
Anyone w ho destroys or d amages e ither a m onument, statue o r o ther p roperty intended for public use o r
decoration and e rected b y t he public authority o r w ith its a uthorization, o r a b uilding, m ovable o bject, n atural
monument or s ite, registered or c lassified, s hall b e punished b y i mprisonment of one month t o two y ears
and a fine of 2 0,000 t o 1 20,000 francs.
Article 1 88 — Removal and d estruction o f p ublic d ocuments.
(1) Anyone w ho removes, removes o r destroys a ny documents placed in the c ustody o f the p ublic authority
shall b e punished b y i mprisonment of o ne t o f ive years a nd a f ine of 10,000 t o 200,000 f rancs.
(2) Anyone w ho destroys or d amages r egisters, minutes o r other o riginal acts o f public a uthority shall b e
punished by i mprisonment o f f ive t o ten y ears a nd a f ine o f 25,000 t o 200,000 f rancs.
Article 1 89 — C opies of a dministrative documents.
Anyone who, w ithout authority o r a uthorization, makes a c opy of a d ocument belonging to an administration s hall
be punished with i mprisonment of o ne m onth to one year.


Article 190 — Misappropriation of s eized property.
Anyone who misappropriates, d estroys or d amages seized o r i mpounded property shall be p unished by
imprisonment of o ne t o five y ears a nd a fine o f 5 0,000 to 1 million francs.
Article 191 — Breaking o f seals.
Anyone who breaks legally affixed seals s hall be p unished with i mprisonment of s ix m onths to t wo y ears a nd a
fine o f 50,000 t o 500,000 f rancs.
Article 192 — Communications with p risoners.
Anyone who illegally facilitates the r elations o f a legally d etained person with t he o utside w orld shall be p unished by
imprisonment of f ifteen d ays to s ix months.
Article 193 — Evasion.
(1) A nyone w ho, being l egally d eprived of his l iberty, escapes o r w ho, being admitted t o w ork o utside p rison, leaves
the place where h e is e mployed without a uthorization, s hall be p unished with i mprisonment of t hree m onths to o ne
year.
(2) T he same penalty is a pplicable t o a nyone w ho r eleases an i ndividual l egally deprived o f h is l iberty.
(3) I n the event of escape o r release with b reakage or v iolence, the p enalty i s imprisonment f rom o ne to f ive y ears;
if i t i s c arried out w ith weapons, the p enalty i s imprisonment f rom f ive t o t en y ears.
(4) I n case t he prisoner i s c harged with a crime o r s entenced to a term exceeding t en y ears, t he penalty i s five y ears
of imprisonment.
Article 194 — Census o f individuals.
(1) T he receiving of stolen g oods by a n individual liable or punishable b y a criminal o r c orrectional p enalty s hall be
punished b y i mprisonment of t wo m onths to t wo y ears.
(2) T he penalty i s i mprisonment of t wo t o t en y ears i n t he e vent of r eceiving s tolen goods by a n i ndividual l iable or
punishable b y t he death p enalty.
(3) T he causes of irresponsibility in t he person o f t he individual c oncealed a nd n ot yet j udged h ave no e ffect on
the responsibility o f the r eceiver.
Article 195 — Subscription for fines.
Anyone who publicly opens a subscription to c ompensate t he c onvicted person for financial penalties i mposed
by a c riminal court s hall be punished with i mprisonment o f f ifteen days to s ix m onths and a fine of 2 0,000 t o 1 0 m illion
francs o r one o f t hese t wo penalties.
Article 196 — Tearing u p posters.


Anyone w ho r emoves, covers or damages a poster p osted i n a ccordance with Article 3 3 o f this C ode s hall be
punished by i mprisonment of f ifteen d ays t o six m onths a nd a fine of 5,000 to 50,000 f rancs o r o ne of these
two p enalties only.
Article 1 97 — Insult o r d amage to a w itness.
The f ollowing shall be punished b y i mprisonment of ten d ays t o one year a nd a f ine of 10,000 t o 200,000
francs o r o ne of t hese two p enalties only:
(a) Anyone w ho i nsults a w itness b ecause of his testimony without b eing a ble, in t he
case of d efamation, t o report t he t ruth o f the defamatory fact;
(b) Whoever c auses any harm to t he w itness by reason of his t estimony.
Article 1 98 — (Law No. 9 3/013 o f D ecember 22, 1 993) P rohibited p ublications.
(1) Anyone who p ublishes:
(a) A criminal o r correctional procedural d ocument b efore it i s read i n p ublic court;
(b) A r eport o f t he proceedings i n w hich t he hearing w as ordered to be held in c amera or of the
proceedings in t he juvenile c ourts;
(c) A d ecision convicting a m inor accompanied by any means a llowing his o r h er identification;
(d) Information relating t o t he w ork o f p arliamentary committees of inquiry, except f or press releases
issued by t he o ffice o f t he s aid c ommittees before t he s ubmission o f the g eneral report;
e) I nformation relating t o t he w ork and deliberations o f the H igh Council o f the J udiciary e xcept t hose
communicated b y the P resident or Vice-President o f said Council.
(2) Anyone who r eports o n the i nternal d eliberations of courts a nd tribunals s hall be p unished w ith a fine
of 10,000 t o 3 million f rancs.
(3) In the e vent o f p ublication i n the w ritten p ress, radio or t elevision, t he p enalties are doubled.
(4) The following a re p rohibited in c ourtrooms a nd during t he c ourse of legal p roceedings, u nder t he p enalties
provided f or i n paragraph 2 a bove:
(a) A ny sound r ecording;
(b) A ny filming by c inematographic camera, p hotographic television o r o ther similar p rocess.
Article 1 99 — R egister o f landlords.


Any landlord or h otelier who, i n d efiance of t he r egulations, fails t o r egister t he p erson h e i s accommodating
or r egisters them u nder a f alse name shall b e p unished with i mprisonment of s ix days t o three months and a
fine o f 10,000 to 1 00,000 francs.
Article 2 00 — I rregular b urial.
Anyone who d isposes of a c orpse in violation of laws a nd regulations s hall b e p unished with i mprisonment of
six d ays t o t hree m onths and a f ine of 2 ,000 t o 15,000 f rancs.
CHAPTER V
VIOLATIONS ON S TATE GUARANTEES.
Section I
COUNTERFEITS.
Article 2 01 — O f the s eal o f the S tate.
(1) A nyone who contradicts t he seal of t he S tate or uses a c ounterfeit seal shall b e p unished with l ife
imprisonment.
(2) A nyone who uses the u nduly procured S tate seal shall b e p unished with i mprisonment of t en to t wenty
years.
Article 2 02 — T reasury E ffects.
Anyone who c ounterfeits o r falsifies the e ffects issued b y t he P ublic Treasury with i ts stamp or m ark, or w ho uses
the e ffects t hus counterfeited or f alsified, shall b e p unished w ith life i mprisonment.
Article 2 03 — S ignatures, stamps a nd h allmarks.
(1) A nyone who counterfeits or f alsifies the signature of t he President of t he Republic, t he Vice-President,
the P rime Minister, or a m inister, deputy minister o r secretary o f s tate, o r a n ational stamp, or a h allmark used
to m ark g old and silver materials, shall b e p unished with i mprisonment of t en t o twenty y ears.
(2) A nyone who uses said stamps o r punches or documents o r m aterials bearing s aid signatures, s tamps
or m arks, which are c ounterfeit or f alsified, shall b e p unished w ith the s ame penalties.
(3) A nyone who uses said stamps o r punches or documents o r m aterials bearing s aid signatures, s tamps
or m arks, which are g enuine b ut unduly procured, shall b e p unished with t he same penalties.
Article 2 04 — T rademarks a nd p rinted matter.
(1) A nyone who counterfeits or f alsifies:


(a) T he seal, s tamp or m ark of a l egislative assembly, jurisdiction o r a dministration;
(b) L etterhead or o fficial printed papers o f legislative assemblies, c ourts or a dministrations
(c) Punches a nd stamps intended t o mark i n the name o f the Government
instruments of weights a nd measures or g oods;
(d) S tate h ammers used for f orest markings;
(e) P ostage s tamps, f ranking i mpressions or r eply coupons issued by t he postal
administration, a nd revenue s tamps and impressions.
(2) A nyone w ho d istributes, sells o r u ses said c ounterfeit o r f alsified s eals, stamps, m arks, p rints,
papers or coupons shall be p unished with t he same penalties.
(3) Anyone w ho d istributes, sells or makes u se of said objects, which a re genuine but u nduly procured, s hall be
punished w ith t he s ame p enalties.
Article 205 — Public a nd a uthentic writings.
(1) A nyone w ho f orges or alters, e ither in s ubstance o r i n the signatures, dates a nd certificates, an
act emanating from t he l egislative or e xecutive power, including a passport, or f rom the judicial
power, o r an a ct drawn u p b y a person s olely authorized t o d o so, s hall be punished by i mprisonment
of t en to t wenty years.
(2) A nyone w ho u ses o ne o f the aforementioned acts i n this w ay c ounterfeited o r a ltered s hall be
punished by i mprisonment of five t o ten years a nd a fine o f 40,000 t o 2 million f rancs.
Article 206 — (Law N o. 90/042 of D ecember 19, 1990) D ocuments and p ermits.
The f ollowing shall b e p unished by i mprisonment of t hree m onths to three y ears:
(a) A nyone w ho c ounterfeits o r falsifies an identity card, a driving l icense, a hunting
license, a voter's card, a f amily record b ook o r a military record b ook;
(b) A nyone w ho h as one o r other o f these d ocuments issued to himself o r t o another under
an assumed n ame;
(c) Anyone w ho u ses a ny of t hese counterfeit, f alsified o r i ssued documents u nder a n
assumed name;
d) A nyone w ho m akes f raudulent use o f one of the a bove-mentioned documents, w hich i s true but
belongs t o s omeone e lse.
Article 207 — Official certificates.
(1) Anyone w ho f orges or f alsifies an o fficial c ertificate s hall be p unished w ith imprisonment of s ix months t o
three y ears.


(2) A nyone w ho u ses such a c ertificate s hall b e punished w ith the s ame penalties.
Article 208 — P ostage a nd r evenue s tamps.
Anyone w ho uses p ostage o r r evenue stamps t hat h ave already been used, or w ho overcharges
postage o r revenue stamps or a buses a p ostal f ranchise s hall b e punished with imprisonment
of t en days t o o ne year a nd a fine o f 5,000 t o 5 0,000 f rancs.
Article 209 — P ostal documents.
(1) Anyone w ho counterfeits or f alsifies:
(a) National or f oreign p ostal i dentity cards o r p oste r estante subscription cards;
(b) Labels, stamps, p ostage s tamps or r eply coupons issued b y t he postal
service of a foreign country.
(2) Anyone w ho sells, o ffers o r uses t he s aid o bjects s hall b e punished with the s ame penalties.
Article 210 — I mitations.
Anyone w ho m anufactures, sells, distributes or u ses a n o bject o r p rinted matter which b ears
a r esemblance to one o f the o bjects o r printed matter l isted in the p receding articles of t his
section, s uch a s t o facilitate their acceptance in place of t he i mitated o bjects o r p rinted m atter,
or s uch a s t o c ause m isunderstanding i n the public mind, s hall be p unished by imprisonment
of ten d ays t o six months and a fine o f 20,000 t o 2 00,000 f rancs.
Article 211 — Counterfeit m oney.
(1) Anyone who:
(a) Counterfeits o r a lters paper, gold o r s ilver money in circulation in the
Republic;
b) Introduces into the territory o f the R epublic such c ounterfeit or a ltered c urrencies;
(c) Issues such c ounterfeit or a ltered currencies.
(2) If i t concerns other c urrencies, national o r f oreign, whether o r n ot in c irculation, the penalty
is i mprisonment of ten t o t wenty y ears.
(3) I f the a lteration c onsists only of t he coloring o f currencies w hether or n ot they are l egal tender
in the R epublic or i n a foreign c ountry, the penalty i s s ix months to five y ears o f imprisonment.
(4) In the c ase of c oins received as g ood but put back i nto circulation after knowledge o f
their defects, t he p enalty is t hree months to three y ears o f imprisonment and a fine of three
times the p utative value o f t he said coins.


Article 212 — C ounterfeit Instruments.
Anyone w ho, without authorization, m anufactures or possesses i nstruments, d evices, m achines o r materials
intended for counterfeiting the S tate s eal, public e ffects, hallmarks, stamps and marks or national o r foreign
currencies shall b e p unished by i mprisonment of five to ten y ears a nd a fine o f 50,000 t o 1 million francs.
Article 213 — I llegal detention.
Anyone w ho, without authorization, possesses an object or d ocument referred t o in Articles 201 a nd 2 11
of t his Code shall b e punished w ith imprisonment o f one t o five y ears.
Article 214 — A dditional penalties.
(1) The forfeitures o f Article 3 0 o f this Code m ay b e p ronounced a gainst those g uilty o f one of the
offenses referred t o in the p receding articles of this section.
(2) For all o ffences provided for i n t his section, c onfiscation under A rticle 35 o f this Code is mandatory.
Section II
USURPATION.
Article 215 — M anufacture o f c urrency.
Anyone w ho, without authorization:
(a) Manufactures either c oins i n any f orm or denomination or notes p ayable t o bearer or introduces,
exhibits or p uts i nto circulation c oins o r n otes so m anufactured;
(b) Manufactures or holds machines, d evices, i nstruments or materials that m ay be u sed for t he
manufacture of currency or banknotes that m ay b e confused w ith legal t ender.
Article 216 — U surpation o f f unctions.
(1) Anyone w ho, w ithout authority, interferes i n p ublic functions, w hether c ivil or military, or performs the acts
of o ne of t hese functions, shall b e p unished with i mprisonment of six m onths to five years.
(2) The penalty i s three m onths to two years o f imprisonment for t he civil servant w ho continues to e xercise his
functions after o fficial n otification o f the temporary or permanent c essation of said functions.
(3) The forfeitures o f Article 3 0 o f this Code m ay a lso b e pronounced.


(4) In t he e vent that t he guilty party t akes a dvantage o f this u surpation t o commit one of the o ffences r eferred
to i n Chapter III o f t his T itle, the p enalties he incurs are t hose provided f or the o fficial h imself.
Article 2 17 — C elebration of marriage.
The f ollowing shall be punished by a f ine of 5 ,000 to 3 0,000 f rancs and, i n the event o f a r epeat offence, i mprisonment
of o ne to f ive years:
(1) The m inister of r eligion w ho, not b eing a uthorized to c elebrate a c ivil m arriage, proceeds with t he
religious ceremony without h aving been provided w ith p roof o f a m arriage certificate p reviously received b y the
civil registrar;
(2) The m inister of r eligion w ho is a uthorized to celebrate a c ivil m arriage:
(a) Performs only t he r eligious c eremony of m arriage or;
b) Celebrates a c ivil m arriage w ithout h aving been p resented w ith a c ertificate f rom the c ivil r egistrar
attesting to t he absence of a ny impediment t o t he p lanned m arriage.
Article 2 18 — U surpation o f uniform a nd d ecoration.
Anyone w ho p ublicly w ears a u niform o r d ecoration to w hich he i s n ot e ntitled or w hich bears a r esemblance
to them that i s likely t o m islead others s hall be p unished with i mprisonment o f t hree m onths to t wo years and a
fine of 5,000 to 5 0,000 f rancs o r o nly o ne of t hese t wo penalties.
Article 219 — U surpation o f a t itle.
Anyone w ho m akes unlawful u se of a t itle a ttached to a l egally r egulated p rofession, an o fficial diploma
or a quality w hose conditions h ave b een set by t he p ublic a uthority shall b e p unished by imprisonment o f t hree
months to two y ears a nd a f ine of 1 00,000 t o 2 m illion francs or o ne o f t hese t wo penalties only.
Article 220 — H onorary title.
Anyone w ho p ublicly u ses a n h onorary title to w hich t hey are n ot e ntitled shall b e p unished with a f ine of 5 ,000
to 2 million f rancs.
Article 221 — D ispositions c ommunes.
(1) The t hree p receding a rticles are applicable t o w earers of f oreign c ostumes, uniforms, decorations and
titles.
(2) However, t hey do n ot a pply t o a ctors i n a p ublic p erformance o r t o c hildren's games.
(3) In the e vent of c onviction for o ne of t he offences referred t o i n the t hree p receding articles, t he c ourt must
order t hat t his d ecision b e m entioned in the margin of t he a uthentic acts or c ivil s tatus documents in which
the t itle w as unduly taken. I t m ay a lso o rder i ts p ublication.


Section III
GUARANTEES O F THE NATIONAL E CONOMY.
Article 222 — Damage to the credit of t he State.
(1) Anyone w ho, by a ny means whatsoever and with the a im o f h arming t he c redit of t he S tate, by any means whatsoever a nd with
the aim of h arming t he credit o f the State, s hall be punished b y imprisonment o f t hree m onths to t wo y ears and a f ine of 2 00,000 to 2
million francs:
(a) Spreads false or misleading a llegations among the public l ikely t o undermine t heir confidence i n the
soundness of the c urrency, the v alue of p ublic f unds o f any kind, t hose o f cooperatives, c ommunities o r
establishments, or public f unds s ubject t o the a dministrative supervision of the S tate, o r in which t he S tate
directly or i ndirectly holds the m ajority of the c apital;
(b) Encourages the p ublic e ither t o withdraw f unds from p ublic f unds or f rom institutions
required b y l aw t o make t heir payments into p ublic f unds o r to sell annuity securities or other
public securities or dissuades them from purchasing o r s ubscribing to them.
(2) In t he event o f a c onviction, t he c ourt must o rder t he p ublication o f its d ecision.
Article 223 — Refusal of c urrency.
Anyone w ho r efuses currency that i s legal tender i n the R epublic up to the l imit o f its l egal t ender p ower shall be
punished with i mprisonment of ten d ays to t hree months a nd a fine o f 1,000 t o 100,000 francs o r one of these t wo
penalties.
Article 224 — Harm t o n ational development.
Anyone w ho, with t he a im of h arming national d evelopment, transfers specialized p ersonnel abroad or delivers
industrial or c ommercial secrets abroad s hall b e punished w ith imprisonment of six m onths t o two years a nd a
fine of 1 00,000 t o 5 m illion francs.
Article 225 — L oan embezzlement.
Anyone w ho, having o btained a loan o f money or a subsidy from t he federal or federated State, a cooperative, a
community or a n e stablishment r eferred to in Article 184 of this Code, u ses i t for p urposes other t han those
intended, shall be p unished by i mprisonment of one t o ten years a nd a fine o f 10,000 t o 1 million francs.
Article 226 — V iolation of p ackaging r egulations.
Anyone w ho v iolates the p ackaging regulations r elating t o products i ntended f or e xport s hall be punished w ith a fine
of 5 0,000 to 4 million francs and c onfiscation of goods.
TITLE I I


CRIMES AND O FFENSES AGAINST THE GENERAL INTEREST.
CHAPTER I
ATTACKS ON P UBLIC S AFETY.
Article 227 — Fire a nd destruction.
(1) Anyone w ho, even i f h e i s the owner, sets f ire directly or indirectly to:
(a) To places u sed a s the habitation o f others;
(b) To any land, sea or a ir v ehicle containing one o r more persons;
(c) To mines or t heir d ependencies w hen they are in o peration.
(2) Destruction carried out under t he same conditions is p unishable by the s ame p enalty.
Article 228 — Dangerous a ctivities.
(1) Anyone w ho fails t o t ake t he necessary p recautions to prevent b odily h arm to
others that m ay r esult f rom t heir dangerous activity shall b e punished w ith imprisonment of six
days t o s ix months.
(2) Anyone w ho, through s erious imprudence, risks putting o thers i n d anger s hall b e
punished b y imprisonment of t hree m onths to three y ears and a fine of 5,000 t o 500,000 francs
or one of t hese two p enalties only:
(a) By using fire, explosives, fuels o r mechanical o r electrical means, or;
(b) By d estroying, e ven p artially, inhabited w orks or buildings e ven if h e is t he o wner; o r
(c) In providing m edical or s urgical c are or in supplying o r administering
medicines o r o ther p roducts; o r
(d) Driving, stopping o r abandoning a vehicle o r animal o n a public h ighway.
(3) Anyone who d rives a v ehicle w hile drunk o r intoxicated s hall be p unished with t he same
penalties.
(4) In t he c ases p rovided f or i n p aragraph 2 (d) and paragraph 3, the court may o rder the
withdrawal of t he driving licence or t he prohibition on o btaining i t f or a maximum period of two y ears.
Article 229 — Substances e xplosives.


Anyone w ho violates the r egulations concerning t he m anufacture, storage, transport,
import, e xport and trade of e xplosive substances shall b e p unished with imprisonment
of one m onth t o o ne year and a f ine o f 2 ,000 t o 1 00,000 francs or one o f t hese t wo
penalties only.
Article 230 — Public roads.
(1) Anyone w ho, without p roper a uthorization, obstructs the u se of a p ublic l and r oute or
a navigable waterway or m akes its use difficult by deforming the r oadway or d iverting
the c ourse of t he waterway, either b y construction, b y improper use, or b y the exploitation
of adjacent land, s hall b e punished b y imprisonment o f one m onth t o two years.
(2) Anyone who, being r esponsible for t he maintenance of a p ublic h ighway o r a w ork r elating t hereto, f ails to do
so s hall b e p unished with t he same penalty.
CHAPTER II
ATTACKS ON PUBLIC P EACE.
Article 2 31 — Meetings a nd d emonstrations.
Anyone who:
(a) P articipates i n t he o rganization o f a ny m eeting o r d emonstration i n a place open to
the p ublic without h aving m ade the declaration t hat m ay be r equired o r b efore the e xpiry
of the r equired n otice, o r after n otification of t he l egal p rohibition;
(b) Before the s aid declaration o r a fter the s aid p rohibition, s end b y a ny m eans a
summons to take p art i n i t;
(c) Makes a s tatement likely to m islead the a uthorities a bout t he c onditions or p urpose
of the planned meeting o r d emonstration.
Article 232 — G athering.
(1) A g athering means any meeting o n a p ublic highway of at least five p ersons, l ikely
to disturb t he p ublic peace.
(2) A nyone w ho, being part of a g athering, d oes n ot leave it at t he f irst s ummons f rom t he
competent authority s hall be punished w ith imprisonment o f f ifteen days t o s ix m onths.
(3) If the gathering c ould o nly be dispersed by force, t he penalty is doubled against those
who r emained there.
Article 233 — Armed g athering.


(1) Anyone w ho, b eing part of an a rmed gathering within the m eaning of Articles 115 ( 3) a nd 1 17 o f this
Code, c arries a weapon or d oes n ot withdraw from it a t the f irst request o f the c ompetent authority shall b e
punished w ith i mprisonment o f three m onths to t wo years.
(2) The penalty is two t o five y ears o f imprisonment for anyone who r emains in t he g athering u ntil i t i s
forcibly dissolved.
(3) The penalty is five t o ten years o f imprisonment for a nyone who i s p art o f the g athering a t the
time w hen o ne or m ore members use their weapons.
(4) The penalties of this a rticle a re d oubled if t he gathering t akes place d uring t he n ight.
(5) The court m ay a lso pronounce the forfeitures of Article 3 0 of this Code.
Article 2 34 — P olitical c haracter.
In t he c ases r eferred to in A rticles 231, 232 a nd 2 33, detention is s ubstituted for i mprisonment i f t he o ffence is o f
a political n ature.
Article 2 35 — S editious c ries.
Anyone w ho u tters seditious shouts o r s ongs i n a p lace open t o the p ublic shall b e p unished by detention f or
eight d ays to one month and a f ine o f 2 ,000 t o 50,000 f rancs o r one of these t wo penalties o nly.
Article 2 36 — G ang l ooting.
(1) Anyone w ho, i n a g roup o r a s a group a nd b y open f orce, plunders or d amages m ovable o r i mmovable
property shall be p unished w ith i mprisonment o f t en t o twenty y ears.
(2) The penalty is life imprisonment i f the crime i s c ommitted during a state of e mergency o r e xception.
(3) The penalty is death if the crime i s committed in t ime of w ar.
Article 2 37 — P ossession and c arrying of w eapons.
(1) Anyone w ho, w ithout l egally required authorization, manufactures, exports, imports, p ossesses, transfers or
sells a weapon or a mmunition s hall be p unished b y imprisonment o f three months t o one y ear a nd a fine o f 5 0,000
to 3 00,000 f rancs or o ne o f these two p enalties only.
(2) The penalties are d oubled in t he event o f carrying a weapon outside the h ome.
(3) A nyone who hands over these weapons o r a mmunition to a t hird p arty without ensuring that the t hird p arty is
authorized t o h old them s hall be considered an accomplice.
(4) In all cases, c onfiscation u nder A rticle 3 5 o f t his Code is m andatory. In t he e vent o f a r epeat offense, t he
court m ay order t he forfeitures u nder Article 3 0 and o rder t he c losure o f the e stablishment even i f i t i s u sed for
any o ther p urpose.


Article 238 — D angerous c arrying o f a weapon.
Anyone w ho, even w ith a f irearms permit, c arries a weapon w ithin the m eaning of Article 1 17 o f
this Code i n a p lace open to t he p ublic a nd i n c onditions l ikely to disturb t he p ublic peace o r
intimidate others shall b e p unished with imprisonment of three months t o two years a nd a
fine of 5 0,000 t o 3 00,000 francs o r o nly one o f these two penalties.
Article 239 — D isturbances o f enjoyment.
Anyone w ho, in conditions likely t o d isturb t he p ublic peace, e nters land peacefully
occupied b y another person, e ven i f it b elongs to him, shall b e p unished with i mprisonment
of fifteen days t o o ne y ear.
Article 240 (new). — ( Law No. 77-3 o f July 13, 1 977) Fake news.
(1) Anyone w ho publishes or propagates, by any m eans w hatsoever, n ews without being a ble t o r eport the t ruth o r
prove that h e had good reason t o b elieve in t he truth of t he s aid n ews shall be p unished b y imprisonment of o ne
to five y ears and a f ine o f 2 0,000 t o 1 0,000,000 f rancs.
(2) T he penalties a re doubled when the p ublication or dissemination is a nonymous.
Article 241 — Insult t o r aces and religions.
(1) A nyone who c ommits a n i nsult as d efined i n A rticle 1 52 a gainst a race o r religion to which
several c itizens or r esidents belong s hall b e p unished by i mprisonment o f six days t o six
months a nd a f ine of 5 ,000 t o 5 00,000 francs.
(2) I f the o ffence i s c ommitted through t he p ress o r radio, the m aximum fine is i ncreased t o 20
million francs.
(3) T he penalties p rovided for in the t wo preceding paragraphs are d oubled w hen t he o ffence
is c ommitted w ith the a im of a rousing h atred or contempt among c itizens.
Article 242 — Discrimination.
Anyone w ho r efuses o thers a ccess to p laces open t o the p ublic or to employment on t he
grounds of r ace o r r eligion shall b e punished w ith i mprisonment of one m onth to two years
and a fine of 5,000 t o 500,000 f rancs.
Article 243 — Public d runkenness.
(1) Anyone w ho has b een convicted of a f ine for p ublic drunkenness a nd c ommits a r epeat offence w ithin
twelve months, a s w ell as any r etailer who g ives drinks t o p eople w ho a re o bviously drunk, s hall be
punished w ith imprisonment of f ifteen days to o ne month and a fine o f 2 ,000 t o 3 5,000 f rancs.
(2) T he court may o rder the c losure of t he establishment by the c onvicted retailer f or a period of
up to t wo years a nd o rder t he p ublication of its decision.


Article 2 44 — Reiteration.
(1) Section 8 8(1)(b) applies t o a subsequent c onviction for o ne o f t he offences p rovided f or i n t he p receding
section.
(2) The c ourt may a lso pronounce t he forfeitures o f A rticle 30 ( 1) a nd ( 2) o f t his C ode.
(3) The c ourt may a lso order t he closure o f the e stablishment by the convicted retailer for a p eriod of u p t o
four y ears and order t he publication o f i ts decision.
Article 2 45 — Begging.
Anyone who, h aving means o f s ubsistence or b eing able t o obtain them through w ork, s olicits c harity
anywhere s hall be punished w ith i mprisonment of fifteen d ays t o s ix m onths.
Article 2 46 — Aggravated b egging.
Any b eggar, even i f disabled o r destitute, w ho solicits c harity i n o ne o f t he following c ircumstances s hall be
punished with imprisonment o f six m onths t o t wo y ears:
(a) B y u sing insults, t hreats or v iolence;
(b) E ntering w ithout t he occupier's permission i nto a d welling o r enclosure attached thereto;
(c) By simulating w ounds or i nfirmities;
(d) In a meeting, unless i t i s husband and w ife, father or mother a nd t heir c hildren, the b lind m an
and his g uide.
Article 247 (new).- — Vagrancy.
(1) A vagrant is a person w ho, h aving been found i n a p ublic place, d oes not provide p roof o f a c ertain
domicile or m eans of subsistence and i s punishable b y imprisonment of six m onths t o t wo y ears.
(2) The a bove-mentioned p enalties are d oubled:
(a) I f t he vagrant i s found carrying weapons o r equipped w ith a n i nstrument suitable f or
committing an offense;
(b) I f the vagrant h as committed (or attempted t o c ommit) a ny act o f violence a gainst p eople.
(3) In addition, the measures p rovided f or in Article 42 ( 1°, 2 ° a nd 3 °) must b e i mposed.
Article 248 (new).- — Dangerous p reparations.


(1) Anyone w ho, with t he a im of committing a c rime or a n o ffence, c arries an i nstrument c apable of
forcing e ntry i nto a b uilding shall b e p unished by imprisonment of t en d ays t o o ne year.
(2) This p urpose i s a lways presumed when these a cts are c ommitted at n ight.
Article 2 49 — G ames a nd l otteries.
(1) Anyone w ho, w ithout l egally required authorization, offers t o the public, in o rder t o create
the h ope o f gain in k ind or in c ash, s hall be p unished by imprisonment of two months
to o ne y ear and a fine o f 5 0,000 t o 3 million f rancs or one of these two penalties:
(a) All betting o r lotteries;
(b) Any o ther g ame in w hich l uck p redominates over skill;
(2) An o ffer m ade o nly t o persons who are members o f t he same c ircle is n ot public.
(3) T he court m ay a lso o rder t he forfeitures o f A rticle 30 as well a s the closure of t he
establishment e ven i f i t i s u sed f or a ny o ther purpose.
(4) T he court s hall order n ot o nly t he confiscation p rovided for in Article 3 5 o f t his Code b ut also that
of t he f urniture and personal effects f itted o ut o r d ecorated for the p urpose of attracting c ustomers
as w ell as t he f unds and effects, furniture or r eal estate intended to r eward the winners.
Article 2 50 — Pawnbrokers.
Anyone w ho:
(a) Without the authorization t hat may be r equired, o perates a pawnbroking o r
pledge h ouse;
(b) H aving said authorization d oes n ot keep t he registers t hat may b e prescribed.
Article 251 — W itchcraft.
Anyone w ho e ngages i n practices of witchcraft, m agic or divination l ikely to disturb p ublic order o r tranquility o r
to harm t he p ersons, property or f ortune o f o thers, even i n t he f orm of payment, s hall b e punished by
imprisonment of two to t en y ears a nd a f ine of 5,000 to 1 00,000 francs.
CHAPTER III
DAMAGE TO T HE PUBLIC ECONOMY.
Article 252 — F alse weights and m easures.
Any t rader o r craftsman who:


keeps i n the p lace of h is business or w ork f alse weights o r measures o r other
inaccurate d evices u sed for w eighing o r m easuring his goods.
Article 253 — ( Law N o. 90-061 of D ecember 1 9, 1990) B ounced check.
(1) Any p erson w ho:
a) I ssues a check o n a bank or p ostal a ccount, e ven foreign, w ithout p rior
and a vailable f unds o r w ithout s ufficient funds;
b) A fter issue, e ven abroad, w ithdraws all or part o f t he provision o r prohibits t he
drawee from paying.
Article 254 — F reedom o f a uctions.
Anyone w ho, by violence or t hreats, b y gifts o r promises or by any m aneuver, disturbs freedom or hinders
the s incerity o f a uctions or s ubmissions shall be p unished by imprisonment of one to six m onths and a f ine o f
50,000 t o 1 m illion francs.
Article 255 — O bstruction of f reedom of w ork.
Anyone w ho, by means of v iolence, threats o r fraudulent m anoeuvres, brings a bout o r maintains a c oncerted
cessation of work i n o rder to f orce a n increase o r decrease in w ages o r to undermine the f ree exercise of work
or industry s hall be punished b y imprisonment of fifteen days t o three years and a f ine o f 5,000 to 700,000 f rancs
or one o f these t wo p enalties only.
Article 256 — P ressure on p rices.
(1) Anyone w ho, b y any fraudulent m eans, artificially i ncreases or decreases t he price of
goods o r p ublic or p rivate effects shall b e p unished by imprisonment of t wo months t o
two y ears a nd a fine of 4 00,000 to 2 0 m illion f rancs.
(2) The p enalty i s doubled i f the g oods a re f oodstuffs or are c overed b y the texts relating
to p ackaging.
(3) The c ourt m ay also pronounce t he forfeitures of A rticle 3 0 ( 1) a nd (2) a nd order t he
publication of i ts decision.
Article 257 — D estruction of f ood.
Anyone w ho, with t he aim of influencing the p rices of f oodstuffs intended for h umans or
animals, c auses or allows t hem to perish, c orrupt o r d isappear s hall be p unished with
imprisonment of one to five years and a f ine of 5 0,000 to 1 m illion francs.
CHAPTER IV
DAMAGES T O PUBLIC HEALTH.
Article 258 — A lteration o f f oodstuffs.


(1) Anyone w ho f alsifies f oodstuffs used f or human o r a nimal c onsumption, b everages or m edicinal
substances intended for sale, or possesses products intended o r s olely suitable for c arrying o ut s uch falsification,
shall b e punished b y i mprisonment of t hree m onths to three years a nd a fine o f 5 ,000 t o 5 00,000 francs.
(2) Anyone w ho possesses f or s ale these foodstuffs, d rinks or medicines which a re falsified,
altered o r h armful t o human health s hall b e p unished w ith the same p enalty.
(3) The p rovisions o f t his article d o n ot apply to f ermented or s poiled f resh f ruits a nd v egetables.
(4) Food, drinks a nd medicines, if they s till b elong t o t he g uilty p arty, a re confiscated. I f t hey a re n ot u sed
by t he A dministration, t heir destruction is at t he e xpense o f t he c onvicted person.
(5) The c ourt m ay o rder the p ublication of i ts decision under the c onditions provided f or i n Article 3 3 o f this
Code.
Article 259 — F alse m edical c ertificate.
(1) Any d octor, s urgeon, n urse, d entist o r midwife w ho, t o benefit o r h arm someone, falsely certifies or
conceals the e xistence o f a n i llness or infirmity or f alsely certifies the e xistence or r esult o f a vaccination or p rovides
false information o n t he origin o f a n i llness, the duration of an i ncapacity or t he c ause o f death shall be p unished
by i mprisonment o f t wo months to t hree y ears and a f ine o f 5,000 t o 1 00,000 francs.
(2) The penalty i s t wo to t en years of i mprisonment in t he c ase o f corruption.
(3) The c ourt m ay p ronounce the f orfeitures listed in Article 3 0 o f t his Code.
Article 260 — C ontagious d iseases.
(1) Anyone w ho, b y h is c onduct, facilitates t he communication o f a c ontagious a nd d angerous d isease
shall b e p unished with imprisonment of three months t o three years.
(2) If the f acilitated contagion i s dangerous for the life of a nimals normally i ntended f or h uman c onsumption,
imprisonment i s f rom o ne month t o o ne year.
Article 261 — P ollution.
Anyone w ho, through t heir activity:
(a) Pollutes drinking w ater that m ay b e u sed b y o thers; or
(b) Pollutes the atmosphere to t he point of making it harmful t o public h ealth.
Article 262 — Termination of an e mployment contract.


(1) Anyone w ho terminates a n e mployment o r s upply c ontract w hen the f oreseeable
consequence of t his t ermination is either a s erious d anger to p ublic h ealth or t o t hat o f
hospitalized p atients, or s erious b odily harm, o r s erious deterioration of p roperty of any
kind, o r d eprivation o f electricity o r water to t he d etriment of s everal people shall b e
punished b y imprisonment o f o ne to s ix months.
(2) This s ection does n ot a pply to anyone who gives a m inimum notice of seven days.
CHAPTER V
ATTACKS ON P UBLIC M ORALITY.
Article 263 — Outrage t o public m orality.
Anyone w ho publicly outrages d ecency shall be p unished by imprisonment of
fifteen days t o two y ears and a f ine o f 1 0,000 t o 1 00,000 f rancs or o ne of t hese two
penalties o nly.
Article 264 — Outrage t o morality.
The penalties provided for in the preceding article shall b e i mposed on a nyone w ho:
(a) Publicly m akes s ongs, shouts o r s peeches c ontrary to good
morals; or
b) D raws p ublic a ttention to a n o pportunity for debauchery.
Article 2 65 — O bscene p ublications.
(1) Anyone w ho:
(a) Manufactures, holds, i mports, t ransports or exports f or t he p urpose of t rading; o r
b) Displays o r d istributes, even free o f charge a nd even not publicly, any
writing, drawing o r o bject tending t o corrupt m orals.
(2) The court may also o rder t he closure, for a period of u p t o o ne year, of t he establishment
where t he c onvicted p erson produces or holds t he said writings, drawings or objects.
Article 266 — Ambiguous publications.
(1) Anyone who r eports, except b y publishing the j udgment, on proceedings f or
declaration of paternity, d ivorce, l egal separation or a bortion shall b e punished w ith a
fine o f 20,000 t o 2 m illion f rancs.
(2) Anyone w ho, w ithout the written authorization o f t he P ublic P rosecutor, g ives publicity by a ny m eans
whatsoever to t he s uicide o f m inors under e ighteen y ears o f a ge s hall be p unished b y a fine o f 2 0,000 t o 2 million
francs.


In t he event o f a r epeat o ffense, i mprisonment of two months to t wo years may also be i mposed.
(3) Anyone w ho contravenes t he provisions o f Article 23 ( 3) o f t his Code on c apital executions shall b e
punished w ith a fine o f 10,000 t o 1 m illion francs.
(4) Anyone w ho, e xcept upon written r equest f rom t he M agistrate in charge o f t he i nvestigation, r eproduces b y
image o r in a ny f orm whatsoever a ll o r p art of the circumstances of v iolent offences a nd a ll t hose c ommitted a gainst
children or against morality s hall be punished w ith a f ine of 2 0,000 to 2 00,000 francs.
Article 267 — A pology for c ertain crimes and offenses.
Anyone w ho publicly a dvocates the c rimes of murder, p illage, arson, d estruction, t heft, as well a s crimes or o ffenses
against s tate security, shall be punished w ith imprisonment of o ne t o f ive years and a f ine of 1 0,000 to 2 0
million francs, o r one of these two p enalties only.
Article 268 — A nimal abuse.
(1) Anyone w ho, w ithout n ecessity, mistreats a d omestic o r t ame a nimal o r a n a nimal l iving i n captivity shall b e
punished b y imprisonment of fifteen d ays t o three m onths and a f ine o f 5 ,000 to 2 0,000 francs or o ne o f t hese
two penalties o nly.
(2) The court m ay a lso d eprive t he convicted p erson o f o wnership o f t he a nimal.
(3) T he c ourt m ay a lso o rder the destruction o f the animal when its c ondition j ustifies this measure.
CHAPTER VI
ATTACKS ON CULTS.
Article 269 — F reedom of c onscience.
Anyone w ho, b y f orce o r t hreats, forces o r p revents t he p ractice of a r eligion t hat d oes n ot i nvolve t he c ommission
of a n o ffense shall b e punished by imprisonment o f o ne month t o o ne year a nd a f ine of 5 ,000 to
50,000 f rancs.
Article 270 — O ffense against a m inister of r eligion.
Anyone w ho publicly s trikes or i nsults a m inister o f r eligion while exercising h is ministry shall b e p unished w ith
imprisonment of one month t o three y ears.
Article 271 — O bstruction of the e xercise of a ministry.
Anyone who p revents t he m inister o f religion from exercising h is o r h er m inistry with v iolence o r t hreats s hall be
punished with t he p enalty provided f or in the p receding article.
Article 272 — O bstruction of worship.


Anyone w ho, by disturbances o r d isorders, prevents, d elays or interrupts the e xercise of a r eligion i n t he
places w here i t i s u sually c elebrated shall be p unished by imprisonment of fifteen days t o one year and a
fine of 5,000 to 100,000 francs o r one o f t hese two penalties o nly.
Article 273 — O bstruction of f unerals.
Anyone who:
(a) D isturbs a f uneral ceremony or p rocession; o r
(b) Damages f unerary monuments; or
(c) Fails to fulfill h is d uty to b ury o r c remate t he c orpse.
Article 274 — Violation o f tombs a nd corpses.
(1) Anyone w ho:
(a) Violation of t ombs or graves; o r
(b) D esecrates all o r p art of a h uman c orpse, whether buried or not.
(2) A ny p erson w ho, i n t he interests o f science, d isposes of a corpse in a ccordance w ith t he regulations in
force shall n ot be liable to t he above-mentioned p enalties.
TITLE I II
CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST INDIVIDUALS.
CHAPTER I
ATTACKS ON B ODILY INTEGRITY.
Section I
HOMICIDE AND WILLFUL INJURY.
Article 275 — M urder.
Anyone who causes t he death o f another p erson s hall b e punished w ith life imprisonment.
Article 276 — M urder.
(1) Murder committed either:
(a) With p remeditation;


b) B y p oisoning;
(c) To prepare, f acilitate or execute a c rime o r a n o ffence, or t o encourage the escape o r
ensure t he i mpunity o f t he p erpetrators o r a ccomplices o f this crime o r t his offence.
(2) T here is p remeditation e ven i f t he identity o f the victim is not d etermined, and e ven if t he
perpetrator makes his plan conditional o n the f ulfillment o f any condition.
Article 277 — S erious i njuries.
Anyone w ho c auses another p erson to p ermanently lose t he u se of all or p art of a l imb,
organ or s ense s hall b e p unished w ith i mprisonment of ten to twenty years.
Section II
VIOLENCE AND W ILLFUL ASSAULT.
Article 278 — Fatal blows.
(1) A nyone w ho, by v iolence o r assault, i nvoluntarily causes t he death o f another person s hall be
punished b y i mprisonment o f s ix to t wenty y ears.
(2) T he p enalty i s l ife imprisonment i f t he violence or a ssault i s committed d uring t he p ractice
of witchcraft, magic or divination.
Article 279 — Assault causing s erious injury.
(1) A nyone w ho, by v iolence o r assault, i nvoluntarily causes i njuries to another p erson a s p rovided
for in A rticle 2 77 shall b e p unished b y imprisonment of five to ten years and, i f n ecessary, a f ine
of 5,000 t o 500,000 f rancs.
(2) I mprisonment is f rom six to f ifteen years when u se is made of a w eapon or a n e xplosive,
corrosive or t oxic s ubstance or of a poison or o f a p rocess o f witchcraft, magic or d ivination.
Article 280 — Simple injuries.
Anyone w ho, b y v iolence o r assault, e ven involuntarily c auses a nother p erson i llness or i ncapacity
for work for more t han t hirty d ays s hall b e punished by imprisonment of six m onths to five years
and a f ine of 5 ,000 t o 2 00,000 francs o r one of these t wo penalties.
Article 281 — M inor i njuries.
Anyone w ho, by v iolence o r assault, e ven involuntarily c auses a nother p erson illness or i ncapacity
for work l asting m ore than eight d ays a nd up t o thirty d ays, shall be p unished by i mprisonment of
six d ays to two y ears a nd a fine of 5 ,000 t o 5 0,000 f rancs or o ne o f these t wo p enalties.
Article 282 — A bandonment o f a n i ncapacitated person.


(1) Anyone w ho m oves a nd a bandons a person w ho is i ncapable o f protecting t hemselves d ue to their physical
or m ental c ondition shall b e punished with i mprisonment of one to three years and a fine of 5,000 t o 2 5,000
francs.
(2) The prison s entence is f ive to ten y ears i f the victim i s abandoned i n a solitary place.
(3) The penalty is imprisonment of ten t o twenty years when the guilty party is an ascendant o r any other person
having authority over the i ncapable person or having legal or de facto custody of them.
(4) In a ll c ases t he c ourt m ay pronounce t he f orfeitures of Article 30 of this Code as well as the forfeiture o f
parental authority a nd f or the s ame d uration.
Article 283 — F ailure t o provide assistance.
Anyone who fails t o provide a ssistance to a person i n danger o f death or serious injury that he could have provided
either t hrough personal action or by providing assistance without r isk t o himself or to t hird parties shall be
punished b y i mprisonment o f one m onth t o three years and a fine of 20,000 t o 1 million francs, o r by one of t hese
two p enalties only.
Section III
COMMON PROVISIONS.
Article 284 — Error c oncerning t he v ictim.
For t he purposes o f Articles 2 75 t o 2 81 i nclusive, homicide, violence and assault a re voluntary even if t he
intention o f t he guilty p arty i s t o harm another person.
Article 2 85 — A ssimilation to violence.
For t he application o f this Code, t he f ollowing are c onsidered t o be violence and assault:
(a) The administration o f any substance h armful to health;
(b) Abandonment as provided for in Article 282;
(c) Deprivation, o n the p art o f the p erson who has legal or de facto custody, of food or care, to the point
of c ompromising the health o f a person w ho cannot either escape t his custody or protect h imself.
Article 2 86 — M edical interventions.
Articles 277 to 2 81 i nclusive d o n ot a pply to m edical acts carried out by any duly authorized p erson w hen they
are p erformed with the c onsent o f the p atient or the person h aving c ustody o f the patient.
However, i f the p atient is unable t o consent, the p erson h aving custody o f the patient o r their spouse m ust
give their consent u nless i t is i mpossible to communicate w ith them without r isk to t he patient.


Article 2 87 — I nterest o f the v ictim.
There is no o ffence when t he injuries o r violence a re j ustified b y t he immediate n eed t o prevent t he victim f rom
suffering m ore serious h arm.
Article 2 88 — S ports a ctivities.
Articles 2 78 to 2 81 i nclusive d o n ot apply t o acts c arried out during a sporting a ctivity, p rovided t hat t he
perpetrator has respected the r ules o f that s port.
Section IV
HOMICIDE AND UNINTENTIONAL I NJURIES.
Article 2 89 — H omicide a nd unintentional i njuries.
(1) Anyone who, t hrough c lumsiness, n egligence, imprudence o r f ailure t o c omply with regulations, c auses
death or injury, i llness o r i ncapacity for w ork as provided f or i n Articles 2 77 a nd 2 80 s hall be
punished by i mprisonment o f three m onths t o five y ears a nd a fine o f 10,000 t o 500,000 f rancs o r o ne o f
these t wo p enalties o nly.
(2) The penalty i s imprisonment of six to twenty y ears if any o f the o ffences p rovided f or i n A rticles 277, 2 28 (2)
(a) and (b) causes injuries, i llnesses or i ncapacity for w ork as p rovided f or in A rticles 277 a nd 2 80.
(3) The penalty s hall b e l ife imprisonment where any o f the o ffences p rovided f or i n A rticles 227, 228 ( 2) ( a)
and (b) causes the d eath of another p erson.
(4) If the h omicide o r injuries w ere c aused b y t he d river o f a vehicle which requires a l icence to b e d riven,
the c ourt may o rder t he w ithdrawal of t he d riving l icence or a b an o n o btaining o ne f or a m aximum p eriod o f t hree
years and, i n the e vent o f a r epeat o ffence, f or a maximum p eriod of ten y ears.
Article 2 90 — V ehicle d rivers.
(1) The penalties provided f or i n A rticle 289 ( 1) are d oubled i f the offence i s c ommitted by t he driver of any
vehicle:
(a) Who d rives while d runk o r i ntoxicated; o r
(b) Who drives w ithout t he required l icense; o r
(c) Who, i n o rder to e scape t he responsibility he i ncurs, f lees.
(2) The penalty i s imprisonment of six months t o four y ears and a f ine o f 10,000 t o 100,000 f rancs i f the
driver of a ny vehicle c auses, in t he c ircumstances referred t o in t he p receding p aragraph, i njuries a s provided f or
in A rticle 281.


(3) I n all cases p rovided f or in t he two p receding paragraphs, the court may o rder the
withdrawal of t he d riving licence or t he prohibition of obtaining it f or a maximum period
of five years. In t he e vent o f a repeat o ffence, t he withdrawal or prohibition m ay b e for l ife.
(4) E xcept i n t he c ase provided for i n p aragraph ( 1) (c) above, a ny d river of any v ehicle who,
having j ust c aused a n accident, f lees to escape r esponsibility s hall b e p unished by
imprisonment of o ne month to o ne year a nd a fine o f 20,000 to 200,000 francs or one o f
these two p enalties. The c ourt m ay order t he withdrawal of the driving licence or the
prohibition on obtaining i t for a m aximum period of two y ears.
CHAPTER II
ATTACKS ON P EOPLE'S FREEDOM AND P EACE.
Section I
ATTACKS ON F REEDOM.
Article 291 — A rrest a nd sequestration.
(1) Anyone w ho, i n a ny w ay w hatsoever, d eprives another o f his liberty shall b e punished by
imprisonment o f f ive t o t en years a nd a fine o f 20,000 t o 1 million francs.
(2) The penalty i s imprisonment of ten to t wenty y ears i n o ne of t he following c ases:
(a) If the deprivation of liberty lasts m ore than o ne m onth;
b) If i t is a ccompanied by physical o r moral abuse;
(c) If t he a rrest i s made e ither on t he basis o f a f alse o rder from the public a uthority, or
with the i llegal w earing o f uniform, o r u nder a f alse c apacity.
Article 2 92 — F orced l abor.
Anyone w ho, to s atisfy his personal i nterest, imposes o n another p erson work o r a
service f or w hich he has n ot o ffered himself o f his own f ree w ill shall b e punished
by i mprisonment o f o ne to f ive y ears a nd a fine o f 10,000 t o 500,000 francs or one o f these
two penalties.
Article 293 — S lavery.
(1) Anyone w ho:
(a) R educes o r m aintains a person i n slavery; or
(b) Engages, even o ccasionally, in trafficking in a person.
(2) Anyone w ho g ives o r r eceives a pledge f rom a person shall b e punished by imprisonment
of one t o five years a nd a fine o f 1 0,000 t o 1 million francs. T he c ourt m ay a lso o rder t he
forfeitures o f A rticle 3 0 of t his C ode.


Article 294 ( new).- — P imping.
(1) Anyone w ho c auses, h elps or f acilitates the p rostitution o f a nother or w ho e ven occasionally s hares
the proceeds of t he prostitution o f another or receives subsidies f rom a person e ngaged in prostitution s hall b e
punished by i mprisonment of six m onths t o five years and a fine o f 2 0,000 to 1 ,000,000 f rancs.
(2) A p erson who, living with a person engaged i n prostitution, cannot prove that t hey h ave sufficient
resources t o e nable them to support t hemselves alone i s presumed to r eceive s ubsidies.
(3) The p enalties are doubled i f:
(a) The offence is accompanied b y coercion or fraud or if the perpetrator i s armed; o r i f he is the
owner, manager o r employee of an e stablishment w here prostitution i s practiced
(b) If the offence w as committed against a person u nder t wenty-one y ears of a ge
(c) If the author is the f ather o r mother, guardian o r c ustomary guardian.
(4) In t he cases r eferred t o in paragraph 3 , the p rovisions o f A rticle 48 must b e applied.
(5) The c ourt may pronounce the forfeitures of A rticle 30 of t his Code and d eprive t he c onvicted p erson f or
the same period o f any g uardianship o r c uratorship; it may also p rohibit h im for t he s ame period f rom
having c ustody, e ven c ustomary custody, o f any m inor u nder t wenty-one.
years.
(6) The c ourt shall also o rder, in the c ase provided for i n p aragraph 3 , a ), t he closure o f t he
establishment, even i f i t i s used f or any other p urpose.
(7) For the purposes of this section, a prostitute is not considered a n accomplice.
Section I I
SEXUAL OFFENSES.
Article 295 — Private o utrage against m odesty.
(1) A nyone w ho, even i n a p rivate p lace, commits an o utrage against public d ecency i n the p resence o f a non-consenting p erson
of e ither s ex shall b e p unished b y i mprisonment of fifteen d ays to two y ears and a fine of 10,000 t o 100,000 francs or o ne of these
two penalties o nly.
(2) The p enalties are doubled i f t he insult i s accompanied b y v iolence.
Article 296 — Rape.


Anyone w ho, by means o f p hysical or m oral violence, f orces a woman, even a pubescent w oman,
to h ave s exual relations w ith him s hall be punished w ith imprisonment o f five t o ten y ears.
Article 297 — S ubsequent m arriage.
The f reely c onsented marriage o f the v ictim w ho w as p ubescent at t he t ime of t he e vents with t he p erson
guilty o f a n o ffence referred to in t he t wo preceding a rticles p roduces t he e ffects provided for i n A rticle 73,
paragraphs 1 t o 4, of this Code.
Article 298 — A ggravated penalties.
The penalties o f A rticles 294, 2 95 a nd 2 96 are doubled w hen the g uilty p arty i s either:
(a) A person h aving authority o ver t he v ictim or having legal o r customary custody
of t he victim;
(b) A civil s ervant o r m inister of r eligion;
(c) A person a ssisted by o ne or m ore others.
Section I II
ATTACKS ON PEOPLE'S P EACE.
Article 299 — V iolation o f d omicile.
(1) A nyone w ho e nters or r emains in the h ome of a nother a gainst t heir will s hall b e punished b y
imprisonment of t en d ays to o ne y ear and a fine of 5 ,000 to 5 0,000 f rancs o r one of these t wo
penalties o nly.
(2) The p enalties are doubled if the offence is c ommitted a t n ight o r b y m eans o f t hreats, v iolence or a ssault.
(3) P rosecution m ay o nly b e brought on t he c omplaint of t he v ictim.
Article 3 00 — V iolation o f c orrespondence.
(1) A nyone w ho deletes or o pens t he c orrespondence o f a nother p erson without t he a uthorization of
the r ecipient s hall be p unished b y i mprisonment of fifteen days t o o ne year and a fine of 5 ,000 t o
100,000 francs o r o ne o f these t wo penalties only.
(2) T his a rticle d oes n ot a pply to s pouses or to p arents, guardians o r customary g uardians
with r espect to c hildren under 21 y ears o f a ge who a re not e mancipated.
Article 3 01 — S imple t hreats.
Anyone w ho, b y any w riting or i mage, t hreatens a nother person with violence or assault, or with
the d estruction o f a ny p roperty, or w ith breaking i nto their home shall b e punished b y imprisonment
of t en d ays to t hree y ears a nd a f ine o f 5,000 t o 150,000 f rancs.


Article 302 — T hreats u nder c onditions.
(1) Anyone who, with a n order o r condition, threatens another p erson, even i mplicitly, with v iolence or assault
shall be p unished by imprisonment of t en days t o six m onths a nd a f ine o f 5,000 to 2 5,000 f rancs.
(2) If the violence or assault w ould c onstitute offences p unishable b y d eath or life i mprisonment, the penalty i s:
(a) From six m onths to three y ears of imprisonment and a f ine o f 5,000 to 70,000 f rancs i n the event of
verbal t hreats
b) F rom t wo t o five y ears of imprisonment a nd a f ine o f 10,000 t o 250,000 francs i n the event of t hreats
in w riting or by image; in this c ase, t he court m ay also pronounce the forfeitures o f A rticle 3 0 o f t his
Code.
Article 303 — B lackmail.
(1) Anyone who, with o rders o r conditions, t hreatens a nother w ith a d efamatory imputation or revelation s hall be
punished with i mprisonment of one to f ive y ears a nd a f ine o f 2 00,000 to 2,000,000 francs.
(2) The penalty i s d oubled i f i t i s t he i mputation of a c rime.
(3) The court m ay also p ronounce the f orfeitures o f Article 3 0 o f this Code.
Article 304 — S landerous denunciation.
(1) Anyone who m akes a false report t o a public o r private authority w hich may lead t o either criminal o r
disciplinary s anctions shall b e punished b y i mprisonment of s ix months t o five years and a f ine o f 10,000 t o
1,000,000 f rancs, u nless h e proves that h e had g ood r eason to b elieve i n the facts r eported.
(2) Imprisonment is t wo t o five y ears when the denunciation is a nonymous.
(3) If, f ollowing the r eporting, criminal p roceedings a re initiated b efore the trial court i n relation t o t he reported
act, the p rosecution of the charge o f reporting is suspended u ntil a f inal decision i s r eached.
(4) The court m ay order t he publication o f the j udgment.
Article 305 — ( Law N o. 9 3/013 of D ecember 2 2, 1993) Defamation.
(1) Anyone who, by one of the means provided f or i n Article 1 52, harms t he honour o r reputation of a
person b y directly o r indirectly attributing to t hem f acts o f which they c annot provide p roof, shall be p unished
by imprisonment o f six d ays t o six m onths and a f ine o f 5,000 to 2 m illion f rancs o r one o f these two penalties.


(2) These penalties a lso a pply to p erpetrators of d efamation committed t hrough the w ritten press, r adio o r
television, without p rejudice to t he r ight o f reply and t he d uty o f rectification.
(3) The truth o f the imputation can a lways be proven e xcept:
(a) When it concerns the victim's p rivate l ife; o r
(b) When i t refers t o a f act dating b ack more t han t en y ears; o r
(c) When it refers t o a f act c onstituting a n amnestied o ffence or t o a fact which h as been t he s ubject o f a
conviction which h as otherwise been expunged.
(4) Prosecution m ay only b e initiated upon c omplaint b y t he v ictim or h is legal o r c ustomary representative,
but u ntil a final c onviction, t he withdrawal o f t he c omplaint s tops t he e xercise o f p ublic a ction.
(5) The limitation period f or p ublic action i s four m onths f rom the c ommission o f t he o ffence o r the l ast a ct
of prosecution o r i nvestigation.
(6) This article a pplies to d efamation directed a gainst the m emory o f a dead p erson w hen the a uthor of
the d efamation i ntended t o h arm t he honor o r reputation o f t he l iving h eirs, spouses o r u niversal
legatees.
(7) The penalties a re r educed by half i f the defamation is not p ublic.
(8) The penalties a re d oubled w hen the d efamation i s anonymous.
Article 3 06 — E xceptions t o defamation.
Do n ot c onstitute any o ffense:
1. Speeches m ade i n l egislative a ssemblies a nd reports or a ny other document printed b y o rder of
any of t hese a ssemblies;
2. The minutes of t he public sessions o f t hese a ssemblies are m ade i n g ood f aith;
3. Judicial debates, speeches m ade o r writings p roduced before the c ourts;
4. A t rue and fair report o f t hese debates and speeches, e xcept for defamation proceedings;
5. The publication o f c ourt d ecisions, including those r endered i n matters o f d efamation;
6. The o fficial r eport m ade i n g ood f aith by a person d uly appointed t o c onduct a n investigation and
within t he framework o f t his investigation;
7. The i mputation made i n g ood f aith by a hierarchical s uperior on his subordinate;


8. Information g iven i n g ood f aith a bout a person t o a third p arty who h as a personal
or o fficial i nterest in k nowing h im o r w ho h as t he p ower t o r emedy a n a lleged
injustice;
9. Criticism of a w ork, a s how, o r any o pinion e xpressed p ublicly, provided t hat
said c riticism d oes n ot reflect p ersonal animosity;
10. H istorical work done i n g ood faith.
Article 307 — I njures.
(1) A nyone w ho, u nder the c onditions of p ublicity provided f or in A rticle 152 of t his Code
and without h aving b een p rovoked, uses an i nsulting e xpression, a gesture, a term of
contempt or an i nvective a gainst a p erson w hich d oes n ot c ontain t he i mputation o f a ny fact,
shall b e punished by imprisonment o f five d ays to three m onths and a fine of 5,000 t o
100,000 francs or only one o f these t wo penalties.
(2) P rosecution m ay o nly be i nitiated upon c omplaint b y t he v ictim o r h is legal o r c ustomary
representative, but until a f inal conviction, the w ithdrawal of t he c omplaint s tops the
exercise of public action.
(3) T he l imitation period for p ublic action is f our months f rom the c ommission o f the o ffence
or t he last a ct o f prosecution or investigation.
(4) T his article a pplies t o i nsults t o the memory o f a deceased p erson u nder the s ame
conditions a s t hose p rovided for i n a rticle 305 (5).
Article 308 — E xtortion o f an act, a s ignature, a blank c heck.
(1) A nyone w ho, b y violence, constraint o r f raud, extorts the s ignature or d elivery of a ny
document c ontaining a n o bligation, provision o r d ischarge or l ikely t o compromise t he p erson
or w ealth of the signatory shall b e p unished by i mprisonment of five t o ten y ears a nd
a fine of 10,000 t o 500,000 francs.
(2) Anyone w ho, b y t he s ame m eans, obtains t he delivery of a blank c heck and completes i t w ith one of the documents
provided f or i n t he p receding p aragraph shall b e punished with the same penalties.
CHAPTER III
ATTACKS ON PEOPLE'S T RUST.
Article 309 — A buse o f carte blanche.
Anyone w ho misuses a b lank check e ntrusted to him t o fraudulently write on i t either a n
obligation, p rovision o r discharge, o r a s tatement likely t o compromise t he p erson o r w ealth o f
the s ignatory, s hall b e p unished by imprisonment o f o ne to five y ears a nd a fine of 5 ,000
to 500,000 f rancs or only one o f these two penalties.
Article 310 — P rofessional s ecrecy.


(1) Anyone w ho r eveals, w ithout t he authorization o f the p erson t o w hom i t belongs, a confidential f act
which h e only knew o r which w as o nly c onfided to h im b ecause of h is profession o r p osition shall be
punished b y i mprisonment o f three m onths to t hree y ears a nd a fine o f 2 0,000 t o 1 00,000 francs.
(2) The preceding paragraph does n ot a pply t o s tatements m ade t o judicial o r police authorities concerning
facts likely to constitute a c rime or a n offence, nor t o legal r esponses to any r equest w hatsoever.
(3) Paragraph 2 d oes not a pply:
a) To the d octor and surgeon who a re a lways bound b y professional secrecy, except w ithin t he l imits
of a l egal requisition or a n e xpert commission;
(b) To the o fficial on the w ritten order o f t he G overnment;
c) To the m inister o f religion a nd to the l awyer.
(4) The court m ay p ronounce t he f orfeitures of Article 3 0 o f this Code.
Article 3 11 — Violation o f t rade secrets.
(1) Anyone w ho r eveals, w ithout t he a uthorization o f the p erson t o whom he b elongs, a n i ndustrial o r
commercial fact o r p rocess of w hich h e has b ecome aware b y reason o f his employment shall b e
punished by i mprisonment of t hree months t o t hree years and a f ine o f 100,000 to 5 m illion f rancs o r one of these
two penalties only.
(2) The court m ay p ronounce t he f orfeitures of Article 3 0 o f this Code.
Article 3 12 — C orruption o f e mployee.
Any employee r emunerated i n a ny f orm whatsoever who, without t he a uthorization o f his employer, receives
gifts o r accepts p romises t o p erform o r r efrain from p erforming a n a ct o f his service s hall b e p unished by
imprisonment of o ne to t hree y ears and a f ine o f 50,000 t o 500,000 f rancs o r one of these t wo penalties o nly.
Article 3 13 — D eception t owards partners.
(1) Any director, m anager, administrator o r a uditor of a c ompany w ho, w ith the a im of misleading o ne or more
partners, shareholders or c reditors, makes a f alse d eclaration o r provides a f alse a ccount s hall b e p unished by
imprisonment of o ne t o f ive y ears a nd a f ine o f 50,000 t o 1 m illion f rancs.
(2) The court m ay a lso p ronounce t he f orfeitures of Article 3 0 o f this Code.
Article 3 14 — F orgery of p rivate or c ommercial d ocuments.
(1) Anyone w ho c ounterfeits or f alsifies a p rivate document c ontaining a n o bligation, provision o r
discharge, whether i n s ubstance or i n s ignatures, dates o r certificates, shall b e p unished by imprisonment
of three t o eight y ears a nd a f ine o f 5 0,000 t o 1 m illion f rancs.


(2) The p enalty i s imprisonment of five t o ten y ears and a fine of 100,000 to 2 million
francs i f it is either:
a) From a commercial o r banking d ocument;
(b) A document certifying a land right;
(c) T he mandate to s ign o ne of t he documents referred to i n ( a) and ( b);
d) Of a will;
(3) A nyone w ho uses either:
From one of t he above-mentioned w ritings;
From an outdated w riting by presenting i t as s till v alid;
From a w riting r eferring to a nother person while p retending t o b e t hat p erson.
Article 3 15 — C ounterfeiting of certificate.
(1) A nyone w ho counterfeits or f alsifies a private certificate o r issues a false certificate n ot
otherwise punishable or u ses a counterfeit, f alsified o r f alse private certificate s hall b e
punished with imprisonment o f o ne month t o o ne year.
(2) The p enalty i s doubled in t he event o f f orgery, f abrication o r u se o f a medical c ertificate
or p rivate writing n ot p rovided for i n A rticle 3 14.
CHAPTER IV
DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
Section I
DESTRUCTION.
Article 316 — D estruction.
(1) Anyone w ho destroys, even p artially, a ny property b elonging in w hole o r i n p art to
another o r encumbered by a charge i n favor of another shall be punished by i mprisonment o f
fifteen days to three years and a f ine o f 5 ,000 to 100,000 francs o r o ne o f these t wo penalties o nly.
(2) T he p enalty i s i mprisonment of two t o ten years and a fine of 1 0,000 to 5 00,000 francs o r o ne o f t hese t wo
penalties only i f t he destruction c oncerns buildings, w orks, s hips o r i nstallations.
Article 317 — D estruction of boundary m arkers o r fences.
Anyone w ho:


Removes or m oves a b oundary marker o r a ny other s ign established t o m ark the b oundary
between different p roperties;
Destroys a fence o f any k ind.
Section I I
OFFENSES AGAINST OTHER PEOPLE'S W EALTH.
Article 3 18 — (L. n°90-061 o f 1 9 Dec. 1 990). Theft, b reach of t rust, fraud.
(1) Anyone w ho harms the w ealth of another shall be p unished w ith imprisonment of f ive to t en
years a nd a fine of 100,000 t o 1,000,000 f rancs:
a) B y t heft, t hat i s to say b y taking a nother person's t hing;
(b) By b reach o f trust, that is to s ay by d iverting or destroying or dissipating any property
which c ould be s tolen and w hich he has received on c ondition o f p reserving it, r eturning i t,
representing it o r m aking a s pecific use of i t.
However, this p aragraph does n ot a pply to t he loan of m oney o r t o c onsumer l oans;
(c) By fraud, that i s to say b y falsely determining t he v ictim e ither b y m aneuvers or b y
affirming o r c oncealing a fact.
(2) The c ourt m ay a lso p ronounce the f orfeitures of A rticle 30 o f t his Code.
Article 319 — Special t heft a nd b reach o f t rust.
Article 318 i s applicable:
(1) To anyone w ho u nduly appropriates energy f rom any motive f orce;
(2) To anyone w ho, w ithout intending to appropriate a nother's property, u ses it w ithout r ight;
(3) To one w ho a ppropriates a l ost thing;
(4) To t he pledged debtor w ho removes or misappropriates t he p ledged p roperty.
Article 320 — (L. n°90-0610 of 19 D ec 1990). Aggravated t heft.
(1) The p enalties of Article 3 18 are d oubled if t he t heft was committed either:
- Using v iolence;
- With c arrying o f w eapons;
- By e xternal b reak-in, by climbing o r using a f alse key;


- U sing a m otor vehicle.
(2) A nyone w ho c ommits a robbery with violence r esulting i n the death o f a nother p erson
or s erious i njuries a s provided f or in Articles 277 and 2 79 of t his C ode s hall be punished with
the death penalty.
Article 3 21 — Aggravated breach of t rust a nd fraud.
The p enalties of A rticle 318 a re d oubled if the b reach o f trust or fraud was committed either:
By a L awyer, N otary, A uctioneer, B ailiff, e nforcement a gent or b y a business agent;
By a n e mployee to t he detriment of h is e mployer or v ice versa;
By a p erson a ppealing o r having a ppealed t o t he p ublic.
Article 3 22 — Filouteries.
(1) A nyone w ho, being u nable t o p ay:
Is served drinks or food that h e has consumed o n the premises; or
Occupies a r oom i n a h otel; o r
Rent a c ar f or free.
(2) In the cases provided f or in paragraph 1 ( a) and ( b), t he duration of t he supply of
drinks or food or t he o ccupation o f the a ccommodation m ust n ot have exceeded one week.
(3) Anyone w ho u nlawfully r etains another's property s hall b e punished with t he same penalties.
Article 3 23 — Immunities.
Articles 3 18, 319 a nd 3 22 d o not apply b etween spouses, between legitimate or adoptive ascendants
and descendants or between n atural ascendants and d escendants up to the s econd d egree i f they l ive
together or are recognized, against the widow o r widower o n the essential g oods which b elonged t o the
deceased spouse.
Article 3 24 — (Law N o. 9 0-096 o f D ecember 19, 1 990) C oncealment.
(1) A nyone w ho h olds or disposes of t hings obtained b y m eans o f an offence, e ither k nowingly o r with
reason t o suspect t heir c riminal o rigin, shall be punished b y the p enalties of Article 3 18.
(2) I n the e vent o f a c rime, t he p enalties a re doubled.
Article 325 — U sury.


(1) Any lender w ho demands o r r eceives interest o r other remuneration in e xcess o f t he rates
fixed b y l aw for loans of the s ame t ype shall b e p unished by a fine o f 5 ,000 to 1 million f rancs.
nature.
(2) In t he event of a repeat offense, the p enalty i s imprisonment o f fifteen days to one year and the fine is d oubled.
(3) T he c ourt m ay order the p ublication of its d ecision under the c onditions provided
for in Article 3 3 o f t his Code.
(4) F or the p urposes of t his s ection, t he b orrower is not c onsidered a n a ccomplice.
Article 326 — Prohibited sales.
Anyone w ho:
Offers goods to the public w ith the hope o f o btaining t hese g oods f ree of c harge o r
a reduction i n t he price if they p lace vouchers with t hird parties or determine t hird parties for
purchase;
Sends g oods to a recipient w ithout p rior request f rom the recipient, indicating t hat t he
recipient has t he c hoice between p urchase o r return, even i f t his return c an be made at
no cost t o the recipient.
Article 3 27 — A rtistic p roperty.
(1) A nyone w ho, in d efiance of t he l aws a nd regulations relating t o the property of
authors:
Publishes in w hole or in p art writings, m usical c ompositions, drawings, p aintings o r
any o ther printed o r e ngraved production; or
Places into c ommerce, exports or i mports a work s o counterfeited; or
Reproduces, represents or d istributes b y a ny m eans w hatsoever a w ork o f the m ind.
(2) The confiscation of the o bject o f t he offence a s well a s the p lates, moulds a nd matrices used
for t he c ounterfeiting i s also ordered, a s is the c onfiscation o f the proceeds o btained b y the
illicit reproduction, r epresentation or d istribution, and the p roceeds o f this confiscation are
applied to t he compensation of t he injured p arties.
(3) T he c ourt m ay order the p ublication of its d ecision under the c onditions provided
for in Article 3 3 o f t his Code.
Article 328 — P atent o f invention.
(1) Anyone w ho unduly e xploits a patent o r conceals, sells, exports o r imports a
counterfeit object s hall be punished b y a f ine o f 50,000 t o 300,000 francs.


(2) In the e vent o f a r epeat o ffence or if the g uilty party i s or h as b een e mployed i n the e stablishment w here t he
patent w as regularly used, a p rison s entence o f o ne t o s ix months m ay a lso be i mposed.
(3) In all c ases, the c ourt must o rder t he c onfiscation of t he i nfringing o bject f or t he b enefit o f the o wner o f t he
patent a nd m ay order t he p ublication o f i ts decision under the c onditions provided f or i n Article 3 3 o f this C ode.
(4) Public action m ay o nly be b rought upon c omplaint by the i njured p arty.
Article 329 — Industrial d esigns and m odels.
(1) Anyone w ho u nduly e xploits a r egistered design o r m odel s hall be p unished b y a f ine of 5 0,000 t o 300,000
francs.
(2) In the e vent o f a r epeat o ffence or if the o ffender w orks or h as worked f or t he i njured p arty, a penalty o f one
to six m onths' imprisonment m ay a lso be i mposed.
(3) In all c ases, the c ourt must o rder t he c onfiscation for t he b enefit o f the i njured p arty o f t he o bject i nfringing t he
guaranteed r ights; it may a lso order the p ublication o f its decision under the c onditions provided f or i n Article
33 of this C ode a nd deprive the c onvicted person o f t he r ight t o b e e ligible and e lected t o the c hambers of
commerce for a p eriod not exceeding t en y ears.
years.
(4) Public action m ay o nly be b rought upon c omplaint by the i njured p arty.
Article 330 — Trademarks.
(1) Anyone w ho i nfringes a registered trademark or u ses a c ounterfeit trademark shall be p unished b y
imprisonment of t hree m onths to three y ears and a fine o f 5 0,000 t o 3 00,000 francs o r o ne o f t hese t wo
penalties only.
(2) Anyone w ho, w ithout infringing a registered trademark, makes a n i mitation likely t o d eceive the b uyer o r
makes use o f the i mitated t rademark shall be p unished b y i mprisonment of o ne m onth to one y ear a nd a
fine of 50,000 t o 150,000 f rancs o r one of t hese two penalties only.
(3) In all c ases, the c ourt must o rder c onfiscation for t he b enefit o f the o wner o f t he c ounterfeit or i mitated
trademark; it may a lso order the p ublication o f its decision under the c onditions provided f or i n Article 3 3 o f t his
Code a nd d eprive t he c onvicted person o f t he right t o b e e ligible and e lected t o chambers of
commerce for a p eriod not exceeding t en y ears.
Section I II
BANKRUPTCY.
Article 331 — Fraudulent debtor.


(1) Any debtor, e ven a non-trader, who, i n o rder to avoid paying one or more of his creditors, g ives,
delivers, transfers, encumbers, removes o r conceals all o r part of his property shall be p unished with
imprisonment of f ifteen days to o ne y ear.
(2) In the event o f t heft o r concealment within t wo months p receding a court d ecision, even if n ot final, t he
purpose is presumed.
Article 3 32 — S imple bankruptcy.
(1) Any trader w ho, in a s tate of c essation o f p ayments, or before such cessation i n cases w here it i s a
consequence thereof, shall be punished b y imprisonment of one month to two years:
- Incurs personal o r h ousehold expenses t hat are c onsidered excessive; or
- Spending l arge s ums either o n purely r andom t ransactions o r on f ictitious stock market o r commodity
transactions; or
- Contracts on behalf of o thers w ithout r eceiving any value in exchange, c ommitments t hat
are t oo c onsiderable i n v iew of h is situation when he c ontracted t hem.
(2) Any trader who, having c eased his p ayments:
Engages in either p urchases t o r esell b elow the m arket price, or in borrowing, circulation o f effects or other
ruinous means o f o btaining f unds;
Pays a creditor to t he detriment of t he e state; or
Does n ot make the full declaration required by law to the registry w ithin f ifteen d ays o f this cessation.
(3) Any bankrupt trader who:
- Is declared bankrupt again w ithout having fulfilled t he o bligations of a p revious a rrangement; or
- Violates the regulations in f orce relating to the commercial r egister; or
- Has n ot kept books a nd i nventories a ccurately o r h as kept b ooks o r inventories incompletely or
irregularly or has k ept books o r i nventories which, without there b eing fraud, n evertheless do n ot
provide t he true active or passive situation; or
- Without l egitimate i mpediment d oes not a ppear i n person t o the t rustees in the cases a nd within t he
time l imits set.
(4) The same penalty shall apply t o b ankers, stockbrokers and brokers who h ave simply c eased their payments.
Article 333 — F raudulent b ankruptcy.


(1) A ny trader who ceases to m ake payments shall be punished with imprisonment of five t o t en years.
And :
- Subtracts his books; o r
- Misappropriates or conceals p art o f its a ssets; o r
- Either in w riting, or by public a cts o r commitments under p rivate signature, or b y his b alance s heet,
fraudulently a cknowledges h imself to be a debtor o f s ums w hich he did n ot owe.
(2) T he penalties are doubled w ith regard t o t he b anker, t he stockbroker or t he broker.
Article 334 — C orporate officers.
(1) The f ollowing shall be p unished by t he penalties of A rticle 332:
Any corporate officer who, i n t hat c apacity, c ommits o ne of t he acts r eferred t o in A rticle 3 32 (1) (b) and (c), ( 2) (a)
and (b), ( 3) ( c);
Any person l isted i n p aragraph (a) above who, in order to shield all o r p art o f his a ssets f rom the proceedings of
the company in a state o f cessation of p ayments or f rom those of t he partners or c ompany creditors, diverts or
conceals p art of h is assets o r acknowledges that he is a debtor o f sums t hat he does not owe.
(2) Any corporate officer who, in t hat c apacity, c ommits one o f t he acts r eferred to i n s aid a rticle s hall be p unished
by t he p enalties set o ut in A rticle 3 33 ( 1).
Article 335 — O ffenses c ommitted by someone other t han t he bankrupt.
(1) The f ollowing s hall b e punished by i mprisonment of five to t en years:
Anyone w ho, i n the i nterest o f a trader w ho h as ceased p ayments, removes or c onceals all or p art o f the latter's
assets;
Anyone w ho, i n a bankruptcy, presents o r asserts, directly o r i ndirectly, a false c laim.
(2) E ven i n the event of complicity, the p enalty i s imprisonment of one to five y ears against t he spouse,
descendant o r ascendant o f the s aid t rader w ho embezzles or c onceals all o r p art o f t he assets.
Article 336 — I llegitimate advantages o f a creditor.
(1) A c reditor of a bankrupt person who:
Stipulates e ither with the b ankrupt or with any o ther p erson s pecial benefits by r eason o f h is v ote in t he bankruptcy
deliberations; or


Makes a s pecial t reaty which w ould r esult in a n a dvantage in h is favor at t he expense of t he bankrupt's a ssets.
(2) T he p enalties are doubled if t he g uilty p arty is a bankruptcy trustee.
CHAPTER V
ATTACKS AGAINST C HILDREN A ND F AMILIES.
Article 337 — Abortion.
(1) A w oman w ho p rocures an a bortion for h erself or w ho consents to i t shall be p unished by i mprisonment
of f ifteen d ays t o o ne year and a f ine of 5 ,000 t o 200,000 francs or o ne o f t hese two penalties only.
(2) A nyone w ho, e ven w ith h er c onsent, procures an a bortion for a woman s hall be p unished by i mprisonment of
one to f ive y ears and a fine o f 1 00,000 to 2 ,000,000 f rancs.
(3) T he p enalties of p aragraph 2 a re doubled:
Against any person who habitually performs abortions;
Against a p erson who practices a m edical profession o r i n connection with this profession.
(4) T he c losure of t he p rofessional premises and t he prohibition of e xercising t he profession may a lso be
ordered u nder t he c onditions p rovided f or i n Articles 3 4 a nd 3 6 o f t his Code.
Article 3 38 — Violence against a pregnant w oman.
Anyone who, t hrough violence against a pregnant w oman o r a n u nborn child, c auses, e ven u nintentionally, t he
death or permanent disability o f t he c hild shall b e punished by i mprisonment o f f ive to t en years and a fine of
100,000 t o 2 ,000,000 f rancs.
Article 339 — Exceptions.
(1) A rticles 337 and 338 are not a pplicable if t he a cts are c arried out by a n a uthorized person a nd j ustified by t he
need to s ave t he mother from a s erious danger t o h er h ealth.
(2) I n t he c ase of p regnancy resulting f rom rape, m edical a bortion does n ot constitute an o ffense i f it is
carried o ut a fter c ertification b y t he p ublic prosecutor of t he materiality of t he facts.
Article 340 — Infanticide.
The m other who is t he p rincipal p erpetrator or a ccomplice o f t he murder o r a ssassination o f h er c hild within o ne
month of h is birth is o nly liable t o i mprisonment of f ive to t en years, without these provisions b eing
applicable t o o ther perpetrators or accomplices.
Article 341 — Infringement of filiation.


Anyone w hose a ctions r esult i n d epriving a c hild of proof o f their p arentage shall b e punished with
imprisonment o f f ive t o t en years.
Article 3 42 — Slavery a nd p awning.
When the v ictim i s a m inor u nder e ighteen y ears of a ge:
The penalty i s i mprisonment of f ifteen to t wenty years i n the c ase of a c rime a s defined i n Article 2 93 (1);
The penalty i s i mprisonment of f ive t o t en years a nd a f ine o f 50,000 t o 1,000,000 f rancs in the e vent o f an offence
as d efined i n Article 2 93 ( 2) a nd t he f orfeitures of Article 3 0 of this C ode m ay b e imposed.
Article 3 43 (new).- — Prostitution.
(1) Any person o f e ither sex w ho habitually e ngages in sexual a cts w ith another person for remuneration
shall b e punished b y i mprisonment of s ix months t o five y ears a nd a f ine o f 20,000 t o 500,000 f rancs.
(2) Anyone w ho, with a v iew t o p rostitution or d ebauchery, publicly s olicits p ersons of either s ex b y g estures,
words, writings or b y a ny other means s hall be punished w ith the s ame penalties.
Article 3 44 (new).- — Corruption of youth.
(1) Anyone w ho incites, e ncourages or f acilitates the d ebauchery or corruption o f a p erson under the a ge of twenty-
one shall b e punished by i mprisonment of o ne t o f ive y ears and a f ine of 20,000 t o 1,000,000 f rancs.
(2) The penalties are doubled if the victim i s under sixteen y ears o f age.
(3) The court m ay also pronounce the forfeitures o f Article 3 0 of this C ode a nd deprive t he c onvicted p erson
for t he s ame period of p arental a uthority, of a ny guardianship o r curatorship.
Article 3 45 — Danger m oral.
Anyone w ho, h aving l egal or c ustomary custody o f a c hild u nder eighteen years o f age, allows t hem to
reside i n a house o r e stablishment w here p rostitution i s practiced or t o work t here o r for a p rostitute shall b e
punished b y i mprisonment of fifteen days to six m onths a nd a f ine o f 10,000 t o 100,000 f rancs.
Article 3 46 (new).- — Outrage to t he modesty of a m inor under s ixteen y ears of age.
(1) Anyone w ho commits a n act of i ndecency in the p resence o f a m inor u nder the a ge of sixteen s hall b e
punished by i mprisonment o f two t o f ive y ears and a f ine of 20,000 t o 200,000 f rancs.


(2) The penalties a re doubled if t he insult is committed with v iolence or i f the p erpetrator is one of the p ersons
referred t o i n A rticle 2 98.
(3) The penalty i s i mprisonment of t en to f ifteen years if the p erpetrator has h ad s exual intercourse even w ith t he
consent of t he victim.
(4) In c ase of r ape, i mprisonment is f rom f ifteen t o twenty-five y ears. Imprisonment i s for l ife i f the p erpetrator is
one of t he p ersons listed in Article 2 98.
(5) In a ll cases, the court m ay d eprive the convicted p erson of parental a uthority, o f any g uardianship or
curatorship d uring the periods provided f or in Article 31 ( 4) o f this C ode.
Article 347 (new).- — Insult of a m inor aged sixteen t o twenty-one.
(1) Where the o ffences r eferred t o i n Articles 295, 296 a nd 3 47 b is h ave b een committed against a minor a ged
between s ixteen a nd t wenty-one, the penalties p rovided f or i n the s aid A rticles shall b e d oubled.
(2) The court may i n a ll cases deprive the convicted p erson of parental a uthority, o f any g uardianship or
curatorship d uring the periods provided f or in Article 31 o f this C ode.
Article 347 bis — Homosexuality.
Any person w ho h as sexual r elations with a p erson o f the s ame sex s hall b e p unished b y i mprisonment of six
months t o f ive years and a f ine o f 2 0,000 t o 200,000 f rancs.
Article 348 — Beverages.
(1) The f ollowing shall b e p unished b y a f ine of 5,000 to 5 0,000 francs:
The retailer o f a lcoholic beverages who r eceives in his e stablishment a minor under sixteen y ears of age
unaccompanied by an adult of t wenty-one y ears of age w ho i s supervising them;
- The liquor retailer who s ells o r offers alcoholic beverages i n his e stablishment o r in any o ther p ublic place t o a
minor u nder the age o f e ighteen who i s not accompanied b y a n a dult of the a ge o f twenty-one w ho is
supervising h im;
- Anyone who m akes a m inor under twenty-one y ears old d rink to the p oint of intoxication.
(2) In t he e vent of a r epeat o ffence, the prison s entence is from f ifteen days t o one m onth and t he f ine i s from
10,000 t o 1 00,000 f rancs. T he c ourt may a lso:
Order t he c losure of t he establishment of t he convicted r etailer under the c onditions p rovided f or i n Article 3 4 o f
this Code;
Order t he p ublication of i ts decision;
Pronounce a gainst a ny c onvicted p erson t he forfeitures of Article 30 o f this C ode.


(3) This article does n ot a pply to anyone w ho p roves that h e was m isled a bout the age o f the minor o r t he age
or status o f t he person accompanying him.
Article 349 — A buse of w eaknesses.
(1) Anyone w ho abuses the n eeds, weaknesses o r passions o f a p erson u nder t wenty-one y ears of age t o make
them enter i nto a ny o bligation, provision or d ischarge, or any document likely t o compromise the person o r
fortune o f t he s ignatory s hall be punished b y t he penalties p rovided f or i n Article 318 o f this Code.
(2) For the p urposes o f t his article, a person who i s u nder j udicial p rohibition o r has l egal c ounsel or
is in a s tate o f m anifest insanity i s d eemed to be a m inor.
Article 350 — V iolence against children.
(1) The penalties p rovided f or i n Articles 2 75, 277 a nd 2 78 o f t his Code a re r espectively death and l ife
imprisonment if the o ffences referred t o in the s aid Articles w ere committed a gainst a m inor under f ifteen y ears o f
age, a nd the p enalties provided f or i n Articles 279 ( 1), 2 80 a nd 2 81 a re in this case d oubled.
(2) The court m ay pronounce the forfeitures o f Article 30 of this Code f or the offenses referred t o in this article.
Article 351 — V iolence against ascendants.
The p enalty p rovided for i n Article 2 75 is d eath a nd t hose p rovided f or i n Articles 277 a nd 2 78 a re l ife
imprisonment if the o ffences referred to i n the said A rticles were committed a gainst t he legitimate, natural o r
adoptive p arents or any o ther legitimate a scendant o f the guilty party and t he penalties p rovided f or i n Articles
279 ( 1), 280 and 281 are doubled.
Article 352 — A bduction of minors.
(1) Anyone w ho, w ithout fraud o r v iolence, kidnaps, e ntices or d iverts a m inor u nder e ighteen years of age
against t he w ill o f t hose to whom t heir l egal o r c ustomary custody b elongs s hall be punished by imprisonment o f
one to f ive y ears a nd a fine o f 20,000 to 200,000 francs.
However, this paragraph d oes not apply t o a nyone who proves that h e was m isled a bout the victim's age.
(2) This section does n ot a pply t o the case where t he minor t hus abducted, enticed o r d iverted marries t he
perpetrator o f t he a bduction, u nless the marriage h as been declared n ull and v oid.
Article 353 — K idnapping with f raud or v iolence.
Anyone w ho, by f raud or violence, a bducts, entices or diverts a m inor under t he age o f twenty-one, even if h e
believes them to b e older, against the will o f those w ho h ave their l egal o r c ustomary custody, shall b e punished
by i mprisonment of f ive to t en years and a fine o f 20,000 to 400,000 francs.


Article 354 — A ggravation.
In the c ases provided f or in the two p receding a rticles:
1° T he penalty is life imprisonment:
- I f the m inor is u nder sixteen y ears of age; or
- I f the c ulprit i ntends to obtain a ransom o r has o btained o ne.
2° T he penalty is death when t he death o f the minor r esults.
Article 355 — N on-representation.
Anyone w ho, b eing r esponsible for a child, d oes not p resent h im t o those who have t he right to claim him
shall b e p unished with i mprisonment of one t o f ive y ears and a f ine o f 20,000 to 200,000 francs.
Article 356 — F orced marriage.
(1) Anyone w ho forces a p erson i nto m arriage s hall b e p unished with imprisonment of five to t en years and a
fine of 25,000 t o 1,000,000 f rancs.
(2) Where t he victim i s a minor under e ighteen years of age, t he prison s entence, in the e vent of the
application of mitigating circumstances, may not b e l ess than two y ears.
(3) Anyone w ho gives i n marriage a girl under f ourteen years of age o r a b oy u nder s ixteen years of age s hall
be p unished by the penalties provided f or in the t wo preceding p aragraphs.
(4) The court m ay a lso d eprive t he convicted person of parental authority, of any g uardianship o r curatorship
for t he p eriod p rovided f or in Article 3 1 (4) o f this C ode.
Article 357 — U nfair d emand f or a dowry.
(1) The following shall b e punished by imprisonment of three m onths t o five y ears and a f ine o f 5,000
to 500,000 francs or o ne of these t wo p enalties o nly:
- H e who, by promising t he marriage o f a w oman already m arried o r engaged i n an u nbroken
engagement, receives from a third party all o r p art of a d owry;
- O ne w ho r eceives all o r part of a dowry without h aving reimbursed a ny r ejected suitor;
- H e who, without qualification, r eceives all o r part of a d owry w ith a v iew t o the marriage o f a w oman;
- A nyone who d emands all o r part of a n e xcessive dowry o n t he o ccasion o f the m arriage o f a g irl o f
twenty-one years o f age or of a widowed o r d ivorced woman;
- W hoever, by demanding a n excessive dowry, hinders f or t his sole reason the marriage o f a m inor girl
of twenty-one years o f age;


- T he h eir who receives the material b enefits p rovided f or i n t he preceding p aragraphs and p romised to the
person from w hom h e inherits.
(2) E ach payment, even p artial, of the d owry interrupts t he l imitation period for p ublic action.
Article 3 58 — Abandonment of home.
(1) A ny spouse, f ather o r mother who, w ithout legitimate r eason, e vades, b y a bandoning t he f amily h ome or by
any m eans, a ll or p art of their m oral or material obligations t owards their s pouse or their c hild(ren) s hall
be punished by i mprisonment of three months t o o ne y ear o r a f ine of 5,000 t o 500,000 f rancs.
(2) I f the o ffence i s c ommitted o nly t o the detriment o f o ne s pouse, p rosecution m ay o nly b e initiated
upon p rior complaint by the abandoned spouse.
(3) T he same penalties shall apply t o any guardian o r customary guardian who f ails to fulfil his legal or customary
obligations with regard t o the children i n his c are.
(4) T he court m ay p ronounce t he f orfeitures of Article 30 of this C ode and d eprive the c onvicted person o f a ny
guardianship o r curatorship for the p eriod provided f or i n Article 31 (4) o f this C ode and d eprive him o f
parental authority f or the same period w ith regard to one o r more of h is children.
(5) W hen the a ccomplice is t he one w ho r eceived all o r part o f the d owry, he is p unished b y
imprisonment of three months t o o ne y ear and a f ine of 50,000 to 500,000 f rancs.
Article 359 — Bigamy.
(1) The following shall b e p unished by imprisonment of t wo months to two years a nd a f ine of 25,000 t o
500,000 f rancs:
The polygamist who e nters into a m onogamous m arriage before the d issolution o f previous marriages;
One who, b ound b y a c ommitment of monogamy, c ontracts a n ew m onogamous m arriage or a p olygamous
marriage before the dissolution o f the p revious m arriage;
Someone w ho, married a ccording t o t he rules o f t he C ivil C ode, c ontracts a n ew m arriage before the
dissolution o f the previous o ne.
(2) T he burden of proof of t he dissolution o f the f irst m arriage lies with the a ccused.
Article 360 — Incest.
(1) I ndependently o f the p enalties provided f or i n Articles 346 ( 3) a nd 3 47 ( 1), a nyone w ho h as sexual
relations:
With his l egitimate or natural a scendants o r d escendants, without l imitation of degree;


With h is l egitimate o r natural b rothers or sisters, full, consanguineous o r uterine.
(2) Except in cases o f notorious c ohabitation or incestuous m arriage, proceedings may only
be brought on the complaint of one of t he b lood r elatives without l imitation of degree.
Article 361 — A dultery.
(1) A married woman w ho has sexual r elations with someone o ther than her husband s hall
be punished with i mprisonment of two t o s ix m onths o r a f ine o f 2 5,000 t o 1 00,000 f rancs.
(2) The same penalties shall a pply to a h usband who, i n the marital home, h as s exual r elations w ith w omen
other than h is w ife o r wives, or who, outside the marital home, h as h abitual sexual r elations w ith a nother
woman.
(3) Prosecution may only b e initiated u pon complaint by t he o ffended spouse.
(4) The c onnivance o r forgiveness of t he offended spouse prevents o r s tops any p rosecution a nd
the o ffended spouse r emains in c ontrol o f stopping the effect o f the s entence pronounced
against t he o ther spouse b y a greeing to r esume living t ogether.
TITLE IV
FINES.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Article 362 — C lasses of contraventions.
Subject to t he p rovisions o f Article 101 ( 2), c ontraventions are divided i nto f our c lasses a nd t he following
penalties apply to them:
- Those of the f irst c lass, with a fine o f 200 t o 1,200 francs i nclusive;
- Those of the s econd c lass, w ith a fine o f 1,400 to 2,400 francs i nclusive;
- Those of the t hird class, w ith a fine of 2 ,600 to 3 ,600 francs i nclusive;
- Those of the f ourth c lass, a fine of 4,000 to 25,000 f rancs i nclusive a nd i mprisonment of f ive to ten
days or one o f these two p enalties only.
Article 3 63 — R epeat o ffense.
In a ddition to t he d oubling of t he maximum penalties provided f or i n Article 8 8 ( 1) (c), t he court m ay, i n the
event o f a repeat o ffence o f the first three c lasses, impose a p rison s entence of w hich the minimum m ay not
be l ess than five d ays and t he maximum g reater than ten days.
Article R. 3 64 — B odily constraint.


1. Bodily c onstraint t akes p lace f or the payment of the f ine.
2. It is s et at five d ays f or 1st c lass f ines, t en days f or 2nd c lass f ines a nd one m onth f or 3rd a nd 4 th c lass
fines.
However, the c onvicted p erson c annot be detained for more t han f ifteen d ays f or this p urpose if h e can prove
his i nsolvency.
Article R. 3 65 — P reference.
In the event o f insufficient a ssets, restitution a nd compensation due to the i njured p arty a re p referred
to the fine.
Article R. 3 66 — R estitutions.
Restitutions, compensation and c osts e ntail imprisonment and t he c onvicted p erson w ill remain in p rison
until full payment.
However, if these s entences are pronounced i n f avor o f the S tate, i nsolvent c onvicts cannot
be d etained f or more t han f ifteen days.
Article R . 367 — 1 st class contraventions.
The following are punishable b y a f ine o f 2 00 t o 1,200 f rancs inclusive:
1. Those who n eglect to maintain, r epair o r c lean ovens, c himneys or f actories w here fire is
used
2. Those w ho v iolate t he prohibition o n f iring fireworks in c ertain p laces. A ny fireworks seized
are also c onfiscated.
3. Hoteliers and others w ho, o bliged to provide l ighting, refrain f rom doing s o, as w ell a s those
who remove lighting e stablished in the p ublic interest.
4. Those w ho neglect to c lean t he streets or p assages i n l ocalities w here this t ask is left t o the
residents
5. Those w ho obstruct the public h ighway b y depositing or l eaving there u nnecessarily any
materials or objects w hich prevent o r r educe f reedom o r s afety of passage as well a s those
who, c ontrary to t he laws a nd regulations, n eglect to illuminate t he m aterials stored b y
them o r the excavations made b y them in p ublic places a nd highways.
6. Those w ho throw or expose in front of their houses things that are l ikely to cause harm e ither
by t heir f all or by unhealthy e xhalations
7. Those w ho d o not c omply with the l aws and regulations concerning the f ight against
pests o f a ny k ind i n the countryside, p lantations o r g ardens


8. T hose who, without o ther c ircumstances provided f or b y l aw, pick f ruit b elonging to o thers for
consumption o n t he spot
9. T hose w ho, w ithout h aving b een provoked, u tter insults a gainst s omeone i n public a s
provided f or i n A rticle 307 (1) of the P enal Code
10. Those w ho imprudently t hrow g arbage a t o thers
11. Those w ho are neither o wners, nor u sufructuaries, nor t enants, nor f armers, n or
enjoying a p iece of land or a r ight of w ay, o r who, being neither agents n or e mployees o f
any of these p ersons, pass over this l and o r over a p art o f t his l and if it is prepared o r sown
12. Those f ound in a s tate o f manifest intoxication i n a p ublic place
13. The Clerk who c ontravenes the p rovisions of A rticle 2 3 D 5 of D ecree No. 6 6-DF-237 o f M ay
24, 1966 r elating t o the report o f capital e xecution.
Article R. 368 — 2 nd c lass contraventions.
The following are punishable b y a f ine of 1,400 to 2 ,400 f rancs i nclusive:
1. T hose who c ontravene the provisions concerning t he opening of a gricultural campaigns
2. H oteliers a nd landlords w ho keep their e ntry a nd exit r egister i ncompletely o r who d o n ot
submit i t at the times d etermined by t he regulations o r when required to d o s o b y t he authorities
appointed for t his purpose
3. T hose who let t hings w ander:
- D angerous demented p eople i n t heir care;
- D angerous or f erocious a nimals, as well as t hose who d o n ot r estrain t heir a nimals
when attacking o r c hasing passers-by e ven if no d amage h as resulted.
4. T hose who t hrow h ard bodies o r r ubbish against t he buildings, h ouses or fences of o thers or
into t he gardens or e nclosures of others
5. T hose who, b eing n either o wners, nor u sufructuaries, nor e njoying a p iece of l and o r a
right o f way, entered i t before the h arvest w as m ade
6. T hose who drive o r allow t heir vehicles a nd the a nimals i n their c are t o p ass over a nother
person's land prepared, s own o r laden w ith a h arvest, in any season w hatsoever, o r in a
coppiced wood belonging t o another p erson
7. T hose who employ women under eighteen years o f a ge in a l iquor s tore f or c onsumption on
the premises, with t he exception o f those belonging to t he family of t he l iquor s tore o wner


8. T hose who, through n egligence or imprudence, damage i n any way a n i nstallation o r the
apparatus of a t elephone o r telegraph i nstallation.
Article R. 369 — 3 rd class offenses.
The following are punishable b y a f ine of 2,600 to 3 ,600 f rancs i nclusive:
1. T hose who c ause t he death o r injury o f a nimals o r livestock b elonging to o thers, through t he
straying of a dangerous m adman, o r dangerous animals o r through excessive speed, b ad
direction, o verloading o f vehicles, horses, draft a nimals, loads or mounts
2. T hose who cause t he same damage b y t he use o r handling of w eapons without precaution
or with clumsiness o r by t hrowing hard b odies
3. T hose w ho cause t he s ame damage t hrough d ilapidation, deterioration, failure t o r epair o r
maintain houses or buildings or t hrough obstruction o r excavation o r such other
works, i n o r n ear public r oads without precaution or ordered o r customary signals.
4. T hose who u se weights or m easures o ther than those established by t he texts i n force
5. A uthors or a ccomplices o f noise, d isturbances or offensive o r nocturnal g atherings,
disturbing the p eace of residents
6. T hose who a llow livestock i n their c are t o f eed on o ther people's l and of w hatever nature i t
may be
7. T hose who, except i n t he cases provided f or i n Article 2 30 (1) of t he P enal Code,
damage o r d eteriorate in a ny way p ublic roads or usurp their w idth
8. T hose w ho, without b eing d uly a uthorized, remove e arth, sand, stones or gravel f rom
public places o ther than p ublic roads, u nless there i s a g eneral u se that authorizes i t.
9. T hose w ho have taken i n s tray or a bandoned livestock d o n ot declare it within t hree
days to the town hall o r t o the v illage chief.
10. Those w ho contravene or fail t o c omply w ith the l egally m ade and regularly published
regulations or o rders o f the m unicipal authority.
However, the c ompetent municipal authority may:
By e xpress provision, c lassify a violation a s f irst or second c lass;
To c ause a d ecision b y the s upervisory authority classifying a contravention as f ourth class.


Article R . 3 70 — 4 th class contravention.
The following shall b e punished b y a fine of 4,000 t o 25,000 f rancs i nclusive a nd i mprisonment of five t o ten
days o r o ne o f these two penalties o nly:
1. Perpetrators and accomplices of f ights, a ssaults or minor violence not r esulting i n i llness o r incapacity
for w ork o f more than e ight d ays, as w ell as t hose w ho deliberately throw hard b odies o r rubbish a t
others
2. Those who, except i n the c ases provided for in A rticle 2 90 ( 1) and ( 2) of the P enal Code, c ause,
through c lumsiness, n egligence, imprudence o r failure t o observe the r egulations, a n i llness or incapacity
for w ork of t hirty d ays o r l ess
3. Those who, o utside o f h unting, l et their d ogs w ander i n s earch o f or pursuit o f game
4. Those who, except i n the c ases provided for in A rticle 2 28 o f the P enal Code, c ause, t hrough
imprudence, inattention, n egligence o r failure to observe regulations, t he f ire of the m ovable o r
immovable p roperty o f others.
5. Those who d amage d itches, fences a nd h edges or remove d ry wood from hedges
6. Those who, b y any means o ther t han t hose p rovided for in A rticles 157 a nd 1 58 o f the C riminal
Code, prevent a nyone a cting f or the e xecution o f laws, r egulations, j udicial d ecisions or legitimate
orders f rom carrying out t he m ission w ith w hich h e is legally c harged.
7. Those who, without legitimate r eason, refuse or neglect t o perform a service o r provide a ssistance
required by the c ompetent authority either i n t he e vent o f a flagrant crime o r offense, o r in o rder t o
ensure t he e xecution o f a j udicial d ecision, or in t he c ircumstances o f a ccidents, t umults,
shipwreck, f lood, f ire o r other c alamities, and w ithout p rejudice t o more s evere p enalties if
applicable
8. Those who, without prejudice to m ore s evere p enalties if a pplicable, send b y p ost documents or
objects n ot a uthorized b y t he t exts i n force or which p rovide a false indication o f the c ontent
9. Those who, without prejudice to m ore s evere p enalties if a pplicable, infringe t he m onopoly of
posts and telecommunications or k nowingly u se an irregular i nstallation t o transmit o r receive messages
10. T hose who, w ithout p rejudice to m ore severe p enalties if a pplicable, use in m anufacturing a
product p rohibited by t he t exts i n force
11. T hose who, h aving attended a birth, have n ot m ade t he d eclaration o f birth p ossibly
prescribed b y law a nd within t he t ime l imits s et by l aw; t hose w ho, having f ound a newborn child, d o
not h and it o ver to the c ivil r egistrar or, i f t hey wish to take charge of i t, d o not m ake the d eclaration
to the civil r egistrar of their commune.


12. T hose who c ontravene or do not c omply with regulations and o rders legally
made and regularly p ublished e manating f rom a uthorities other t han t hose r eferred to
in A rticle R . 369 ( 10) a bove.
However, the said a uthorities may, by e xpress provisions, classify t he c ontraventions
which they i ssue into o ne of t he three lower classes.



=== finance_law2024_Part1 (1).pdf ===


RÉPUBLIQUE DU C AMEROUN PAIX ­ T RAVAIL ­ P ATRIE
­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­ ­­­­­∙­­­­­­­­­­­
www.prc.cm
∙o∙ 2 ' l­ 1 o 1 9
___ _ L OI N 0 ,_.. ....,..:l::.....:...._J ___D_E _ _....:....1 ..;;_9 .:;;..:D E(cid:0)C (cid:0) 20(cid:0)23 je
LOI DE FINANCES D E LA R ÉPUBLIQUE DU C AMEROUN
POUR L'EXERCICE 2024
Le P arlement a d élibéré e t a dopté, l e
Le Président de la République décrète p ar l a présente l a
Loi é noncée c i­dessous :


PREMIÈRE P ARTIE
CONDITIONS G ÉNÉRALES D'ÉQUILIBRE B UDGÉTAIRE E T F INANCIER
1 ­ D ISPOSITIONS G ÉNÉRALES
ARTICLE P REMIER : L a présente l oi a p our objet d e déterminer l es r ecettes e t l es d épenses de l 'État,
de f ixer les c onditions d 'équilibre b udgétaire e t f inancier e t d 'établir l e budget de l'État p our l'exercice
2024.
ARTICLE l WO : L es r ecettes et d épenses d e l'État comprennent l es r ecettes b udgétaires et
dépenses a insi q ue les ressources e t d épenses d e t résorerie et d e f inancement.
1. L e budget de l'État détermine l a n ature, l e montant et l 'affectation des recettes et
dépenses, l e solde b udgétaire q ui e n résulte a insi q ue l es m odalités de f inancement.
2. L e b udget de l'État comprend le budget g énéral et l es c rédits spéciaux.
Comptes.
SECTION T ROIS : La p résente p artie p révoit et a utorise les r essources de l 'Etat, fixe l es p lafonds des
dépenses d e l 'Etat e t é tablit l'équilibre b udgétaire e t f inancier q ui e n r ésulte.
www.prc.cm
Il ­ D ISPOSITIONS R ELATIVES AUX R ESSOURCES
ARTICLE Q UATRE : Les i mpôts, droits, p rélèvements, c ontributions, r edevances, autres p roduits e t
recettes p ubliques d e l a R épublique d u Cameroun continuent à ê tre perçus conformément a ux textes e n
vigueur, s ous r éserve d es d ispositions d e la p résente loi.
CHAPITRE UN
DISPOSITIONS RELATIVES A UX D ROITS D E DOUANE E T T AXES
SECTION C INQ : Appui a ux secteurs prioritaires d e l ’eau potable, d es énergies r enouvelables, d e l a
santé, d e l ’élevage e t d e la pêche.
1. Équipements e t m atériels destinés à l 'eau potable, à l a biomasse e t a u s olaire e t à l 'éolien
la production d'énergie sera e xonérée des d roits et t axes d 'importation pendant une p ériode d e 2 4
(vingt­quatre) m ois, à c ompter du 1 er j anvier 2 024.
2. L es é quipements e t a ppareils médicaux, y c ompris leurs a ccessoires, s ont exemptés
des d roits et taxes d 'importation pour u ne période d e 2 4 ( vingt­quatre) m ois, à c ompter du 1
Janvier 2 024_
3_ L es équipements e t m atériels destinés à l'élevage, à l a pêche e t a u d éveloppement d e la p isciculture
sont exonérés des d roits e t t axes d e douane à l 'importation p endant une p ériode d e 2 4 ( vingt­quatre)
mois, à c ompter d u 1 er janvier 2 024.
PRÉSIDER
VIEUX 2
Relations publiques
ÈRE
GISLATIF E T R EGLE
v, c L
Cl=D AF 'l F ll A r I 1 R 1 E 1 S , S t­ TATUTAIRE ­ S ­ LF4 CHER


4. L es l istes d e m archandises v isées a ux p aragraphes 1 , 2 et 3 c i­dessus, à l 'exclusion de celles
fabriqués localement, seront é tablis p ar un i nstrument d u m inistre des F inances,
après c onsultation d es m inistères concernés e t d es p arties p renantes des s ecteurs
concerné.
5. \ Là o ù s ont d estinés les équipements e t matériaux visés a u paragraphe 1 ci­dessus
pour l a r evente commerciale p ar l 'importateur, c elui­ci s era t enu, c onformément
conformément a ux d ispositions d e l'article 3 33 du C ode des d ouanes de la CEMAC, d e signer un accord
auprès d e l 'administration d es d ouanes, par laquelle i l s'engage à r efléter c es
exonération du p rix de v ente f inal de l ’énergie o u de c es b iens au consommateur.
6. L a r éexportation d es m archandises v isées a ux paragraphes 1 e t 2 ci­dessus r este
sous r éserve du p aiement p réalable des d roits d e douane e t t axes n on acquittés à l 'entrée sur l e territoire national
territoire.
SECTION S IX : S outien à l 'industrie automobile
1. P ièces e t c omposants d e véhicules i mportés par l a fabrication e t l 'assemblage d e v oitures
les e ntreprises b énéficieront d 'une r éduction d e 50 % d e leur valeur imposable à l 'importation p endant une période
de 1 0 ( dix) ans, à c ompter du 1er j anvier 2024.
2. L a r éduction visée à l 'article six (1) est réservée a ux v éhicules
entreprises d e f abrication e t d'assemblage a yant s igné un a ccord avec l e
l'administration d es d ouanes p ar laquelle i ls s 'engagent à transférer l es effets de c ette facilité
aux c onsommateurs e t de r especter les e ngagements découlant de l eur investissement
projet.www.prc.cm
SECTION S EPT : P aiement d es d roits d 'accise ad v alorem sur c ertaines marchandises importées
Les m archandises importées ci­dessous s ont soumises à des d roits d 'accise ad v alorem comme s uit :
PRÉSIDENCE DE LA R
PRÉSIDENCE
SE
SERVI
ET
IRSCAROI I EE CON. ET
VRAI C
3


Description Tarifs personnalisés Taux
Produits à b ase de céréales ( par exemple c orn f lakes) et préparations a limentaires obtenues à partir d e et
5%
flocons de céréales 1904.10.00.000 1507.90.00.000 1508.90.00.000 1509. 1510.90.00.000 1511.90.00.000
1512.19.00.000
1512.29.00.000 I
huiles v égétales r affinées 12,5 %
1513.19.00.000
1513.29.00.000
1514.19.00.000
1514.99.00.000
1515.19.00.000
1515.29.00.000
1515.30.00.000
1515.50.00.000
1515.90.00.000
1516.20.00.000
Saucisse industrielle
à l'exclusion d es
abats, qui sont d éjà
1602. 20.10.000
soumis à d es droits d 'accise Fèves d e c acao, y c ompris c elles d estinées à être utilisées c omme matières 12,5 %
premières D oçi o u nourriture
­
1801.
pour chats C harbon d e bois 12,5%
2309.10.00.000 12,5%
4402. 12,5%
4421.20.00.000 et
Cercueils en bois e t autres p roduits du bois 25%
4421.99.00.900
9403.10.00.000
www.prc.cm25%
Meubles et a ménagements Meta! u tilisés dans l es bureaux
SECTION H UIT : Augmentation progressive d e l a t axation d e c ertains biens d ans l e c adre d e l a s ubstitution
des importations
Français A l'exception d u riz de consommation g énérale relevant d es s ous­positions t arifaires 1006.10.10.000 à
1006.40.00.000, q ui r este soumis a u droit d e douane à l 'importation au taux réduit de 5% p révu à l 'article 2 d e la
loi de f inances p our l'exercice 2 017, le riz d it " riz é tuvé" et le riz "riz p arfumé", q ui sont c lassés d ans l es s ous­
positions t arifaires s pécifiques 1 006.30.90.200 e t 1 006.30.90.300, s ont s oumis a u taux normal d u tarif extérieur
commun p révu a u tarif d ouanier à compter d u 1er j anvier 2 024.
SECTION N EUF : T axation s ur l es e xportations d e bois b rut
Conformément à l'amendement a ux d ispositions d e l'article 10 1 (c) d e la loi de finances p our l 'exercice 2 023, le
taux d u d roit d e s ortie applicable a ux b ois b ruts e t b ois a ssimilés est f ixé à 7 5 % d e la valeur FOB d u volume de
l'essence. C e t aux r este f ixé à 60 % à l 'entrée d e ces bois d ans l es points f rancs industriels.
SECTION D IX : D élais de prescription d ouanière
1. Conformément a ux d ispositions des a rticles 398 et 399 du Code d es d ouanes de la CEMAC,
le d élai d e p rescription p our l es d éclarations de mise à la consommation a insi q ue pour l es déclarations d étaillées
déclarations d e m ainlevée d es o ffres d e dédouanement direct e t suspensives et économiques
les r égimes s eront d e trois a ns.
PRÉSENCLfEr­.r­ ­rwo a•­• •e­••­ '(cid:0)(cid:0)­
PRESSION M
s
CE 4
ET


2. L a p ériode v isée au p aragraphe 1 ci­dessus sera d e trente ans p our les
offres d e d édouanement e t déclarations p our le placement de m archandises sous suspensif e t
régimes é conomiques q ui n’ont p as encore é té apurés.
3. L e d élai d e prescription d e t rente ans visé au p aragraphe 2 c i­dessus s'applique.
généralement à toutes l es opérations douanières relatives au c ommerce extérieur o ù la douane
L'administration n 'était p as e n mesure d e connaître l'existence d e sa créance d ouanière
droits e t t axes a u m oment o ù lesdits d roits e t taxes a uraient d û être payés.
SECTION O NZE : Informations s ur les d ocuments d e t ransport
1. C onformément aux dispositions d es articles 1 17, 1 22 e t 124 du C ode des d ouanes de la CEMAC
Code, c ompagnies maritimes, d estinataires, t ransporteurs i ntérieurs e t les capitaines e t exploitants
des n avires, a éronefs e t tout autre moyen d e transport s ont tenus d'indiquer, sur le
documents d e t ransport q u'ils s oumettent aux bureaux de douane, la description c ommerciale e t
le t ype d e t arif des marchandises q u'ils transportent, a insi q ue l 'année d e première e ntrée e n
service, d ans le c as des véhicules.
2. T oute v iolation d e l 'obligation v isée a u p aragraphe 1 c i­dessus équivaut
au d éfaut d'enregistrement, considéré c omme une i nfraction de d euxième c lasse e t punissable p ar l a
sanctions p révues à l’article 465 du C ode des douanes de l a CEMAC.
ARTICLE D OUZE : T aux de c onversion a pplicable l ors de l a d écharge directe
Le t aux de c onversion m onétaire a pplicable p our l e règlement des d emandes d'enlèvement direct p ar v oie
www.prc.cm
de d éclarations détaillées de mise à la c onsommation est c elui u tilisé lors de l 'octroi d e ladite f acilité.
SECTION T REIZE : P reuve d e l'origine d e l a monnaie e t du statut fiscal d u détenteur a ux p ostes f rontières
1. L ors d u p assage à la f rontière, l es personnes physiques sont tenues d e d éclarer à l 'autorité compétente
services d ouaniers, des sommes e n e spèces, tant en devises é trangères q u'en francs C FA, s upérieures à
Cinq m illions d e f rancs CFA, c onformément a ux d ispositions de l 'article 7 8 d u règlement n°
02/18/CEMEC/UMAC/CM d u 21 décembre 2 018 portant réglementation des c hanges en
la C EMAC. I ls d oivent é galement j ustifier de l 'origine l icite d esdits f onds.
2. L es d ocuments à fournir p our justifier l'origine d es f onds doivent être indiqués par
un i nstrument d istinct d u m inistre chargé d es Finances.
3. E n c as d e d éfaut de p roduction d es pièces j ustificatives convaincantes v isées
aux p aragraphes 1 et 2 ci­dessus, l esdits f onds seront saisis par l es s ervices d es d ouanes,
conformément au p rocès­verbal d e saisie, p uis c onfisqué par d écision du ministre e n
chargé d es F inances e t versé à la B anque C entrale, après d éduction a utomatique d es a mendes
imposées par les autorités douanières.
SECTION Q UATORZE : Organisation d es contrats m ixtes
1. L orsque l es contrôles d ouaniers a posteriori nécessitent d es c ompétences t echniques p articulières, l es autorités douanières
les a utorités s eront autorisées à organiser d es c ontrats conjoints a vec d'autres services g ouvernementaux
et l es organismes p ublics.
2. L es m odalités d'exécution d e c es contrats sont f ixées d ans d es a rrêtés distincts.
instruments.
5


3. L orsque lesdites commandes c onjointes donnent lieu à des amendes d ouanières, le personnel de l 'autre
Les s ervices g ouvernementaux e t les e ntités v isés au paragraphe 1 reçoivent é galement
rémunération c onformément à la r églementation douanière e n v igueur.
CHAPITRE I I
DISPOSITIONS R ELATIVES AU C ODE GÉNÉRAL DES IMPÔTS :
ARTICLE Q UINZE : Les d ispositions d es articles 7 , 8 a, 8 b, 18, 18b, 18c, 18d, 18e, 18f, 1 8g, 18h,
18i, 1 9, 19a, 2 1 (2), 21 (3), 22 (3), 25, 3 3, 3 4, 35, 42a, 44 (6), 5 3, 5 6, 65 bis, 70, 85, 87, 88, 90,
92, 9 2a, 92b (nouveau), 9 3a A , 9 3b, 9 3j, 101, 103, 128 ( 6), 1 41a ( nouveau), 142, 143,
149,225,226,231,239b,470a,543,546a,546b,546c,556, 556, 597,598, 598e, 601, M 1 , M 2 , M 2 a,
M 2 b, M 3 , M 6a, M 8a, M 1 3, M 19a ( nouveau),
Les articles M 41a, M 53, M 79, M 8 6, M 9 4a, M 9 4b, M 9 4c, M 1 04, M 1 04b, M 1 04b, M 1 21
(nouveau), M 125, M 145 d u Code g énéral d es impôts, s ont m odifiés e t/ou c omplétés comme s uit :
LIVRE UN
IMPÔTS E T DROITS
FAIRE LA FÊTE
IMPÔTS D IRECTS
www.prc.cm
CHAPITRE
IMPÔT SUR L ES SOCIÉTÉS
DIVISION I II
BÉNÉFICES I MPOSABLES
Article 7 : L e b énéfice n et i mposable e st é tabli après déduction de toutes les c harges d irectement e ntraînées
par l'exercice d es a ctivités s oumises à l'impôt a u Cameroun, n otamment :
A ­ Frais g énéraux
Tous t ypes d e frais généraux, f rais de p ersonnel e t de main­d'oeuvre, f rais relatifs a ux locaux, a u matériel
et a u m obilier, frais divers e t exceptionnels, p rimes d 'assurance, libéralités, dons e t subventions ;
Toutefois, l es d épenses suivantes s eront traitées c omme suit :
1­ Rémunérations d iverses e t prestations de s ervices
(un) .................. ∙ ∙∙∙∙
(b) ...................... .
(c) ...................... .
d) Sous r éserve d es c onventions i nternationales, s ont c omptabilisés e n charges :
à c ondition q u'ils ne soient p as exagérés :
• Frais g énéraux du siège social pour l es o pérations r éalisées a u Cameroun e t aux
PRÉSIDENCE DU R­ÊP7':':'U::­:BL:­:­IQ(cid:0)(cid:0)­,
PRÉSIDENT
s 6


rémunération de certaines p restations effectives ( études, assistance technique,
financière o u comptable) fournies a ux entreprises c amerounaises par d es personnes
physiques o u morales étrangères o u camerounaises .
En a ucun c as, il ne sera admis à ce titre u ne somme s upérieure à 2,5 % d u bénéfice
imposable a vant déduction d es charges concernées.
En c as de déficit, c ette d isposition s 'applique a ux résultats du dernier exercice, n ets
des p rovisions. T outefois, pour les entreprises en situation de déficit permanent e t l es
nouvelles e ntreprises en situation de déficit, l a l imitation s'applique a u chiffre d 'affaires
au taux d e 1 %. En l'absence d e chiffre d 'affaires, la b ase de calcul du plafond est le
montant total d es d épenses a nnuelles engagées p ar l 'entreprise.
Le reste r estera inchangé.
C­ Lancers r éels
Sont d éductibles d es b énéfices :
­ l es p ertes r éelles dûment constatées sur l es actifs i mmobilisés ou réalisables, à l'exception :
• p ertes dues à un détournement d e fonds par u n a ctionnaire o u u n d irigeant d’entreprise, o u l orsque
le d étournement e st imputable à la négligence d es g estionnaires ;
• lwes p ertes duwes a u t ranswfert du p ass.if d ep l a sociétér disscoute à l a.cm
société absorbante, en c as de c hangement d ’activités suite à u ne r estructuration ;
... ... ... ∙∙∙.. ...... . ... ­­­ ... ­­ ∙... ­∙∙... ­­­ ..
. ... ..
­ l es p ertes d ues à des d ommages dûment c onstatés et v alidés en présence d 'une taxation
fonctionnaire a yant a u moins le g rade d e contrôleur, dans les conditions prévues p ar l a loi f iscale
Manuel d es p rocédures, à condition que c es p ertes ne soient pas le résultat d 'une négligence ou
imprudence manifeste d e la p art d u contribuable, t elle q u'établie par l a
autorités o u organismes c ompétents.
Le reste restera i nchangé.
Article 8 a : ( 1) L es f rais v isés à l'article 7 ci­dessus d'une valeur é gale ou supérieure à 100 ooo
(cent mille) FCFA p ar o pération ne sont p as d éductibles l orsqu'ils s ont payés e n espèces.
(2) N e s ont p as non plus déductibles :
­ l es d épenses j ustifiées par d es f actures ne comportant pas de Numéro d 'Identification Unique,
à l’exception des f actures d e fournisseurs étrangers ;
­ l es dépenses j ustifiées p ar d es factures é mises e n d ehors d u champ d 'application d e l'administration f iscale
système de suivi d e la f acturation é lectronique;
­ l es d épenses r elatives à tous t ypes d e rémunérations v ersées a ux travailleurs i ndépendants
professionnels exerçant en violation de la r églementation e n vigueur r égissant leur
professions respectives;
PRÉSIDENCE D
PRÉSI
7


­ les dépenses relatives à t ous types d e r émunérations v ersées a ux contribuables q ui,
la d ate de l a transaction, n e f igurent p as sur l a l iste des actifs des autorités fiscales
contribuables.
Article 8 ter (nouveau) : ( 1) Les c harges et rémunérations de t oute n ature, constatées p ar une p ersonne
physique o u m orale domiciliée o u é tablie au C ameroun e t afférentes à des t ransactions a vec d es
personnes p hysiques ou m orales résidant ou é tablies d ans un t erritoire ou u n Etat c onsidéré c omme
paradis f iscal, ne s ont pas d éductibles p our l a détermination de l'impôt s ur l es s ociétés o u d e l 'impôt sur
le r evenu des p ersonnes p hysiques a u Cameroun.
(2) ........................................................................................................... .
(3) U n paradis f iscal e st un É tat o u u n t erritoire dont l e taux d'imposition du r evenu d es p ersonnes p hysiques o u m orales est
personnes m orales est inférieure a u tiers d e c elle appliquée a u C ameroun, o u d ans un É tat o u territoire
considéré c omme n on coopératif e n m atière d e t ransparence et d'échange d'informations
à des fins fiscales par l es o rganismes i nternationaux c hargés de p romouvoir
transparence e t é change d 'informations à d es fins f iscales.
DIVISION VII
OBLIGATIONS DES CONTRIBUABLES
Articlew 1 8 : (1) Conwcernant l'évawluation d e c et. impôpt, les conrtribuabcles s ont . tenucs d e m
lui soumettre u ne d éclaration d es r evenus t irés d e son a ctivité c ommerciale pendant la p ériode s ervant
de b ase d 'imposition a u p lus t ard le :
­ 15 mars p our les contribuables r elevant d e l 'entité responsable d e l a
gestion d es grandes entreprises;
­ 1 5 a vril pour l es c ontribuables r elevant des c entres fiscaux de t aille moyenne e t
centres fiscaux spécialisés;
­ 15 mai p our l es contribuables r elevant des centres divisionnaires d'imposition.
La d éclaration doit ê tre présentée c onformément a u s ystème c omptable OHADA.
Le r este restera i nchangé.
Article 18 b : (1) L es e ntreprises relevant d e l'entité c hargée de l a g estion des g randes e ntreprises
contrôlées par ou q ui contrôlent d'autres entreprises a u sens d e l 'article 1 9a du p résent code sont t enues
d'effectuer u ne d éclaration annuelle s ur les p rix d e t ransfert p ar voie électronique, conformément a u
modèle établi p ar l 'administration, d ans l e délai p révu à l'article 1 6 d u p résent Code.
(2) L a d éclaration visée a u p aragraphe p récédent d oit notamment c omprendre :
a. Informations g énérales sur le g roupe d ’entreprises a ssociées, notamment :
je. . ..... ........ . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ..
PR(cid:0)SIOE ,
8
ET
1CE
Moi
1:&t C
oaRTll'IED,TRUE et


ii. . ...................................................................................................... '
iii. . ................................................................................................................ ,
iv . . une l iste des a ctifs i ncorporels détenus p ar l e g roupe et u tilisés par l 'entreprise déclarante,
ainsi q ue l a dénomination s ociale de la s ociété q ui possède o u c o­possède l es actifs e t s on
État o u territoire d e résidence à d es fins fiscales ;
v. l a n ature d e la relation a vec l ’entreprise affiliée.
b. D es i nformations s pécifiques s ur l’entreprise d éclarante, n otamment :
i. une d escription d e l'activité r éalisée, y c ompris l es modifications a pportées à l a
cours de l'exercice f inancier ;
ii. un é tat r écapitulatif d es t ransactions avec l es entreprises a ffiliées a u s ein de
signification de l'article 19 a d u présent code. Cette déclaration d oit inclure l a n ature et
le m ontant des t ransactions, le n om de l 'entreprise et l 'état o u l e t erritoire de
résidence d es e ntreprises affiliées concernées par l es transactions et l a
bénéficiaires effectifs d es p aiements c onnexes à d es fins fiscales, l es prix d e t ransfert
méthode a ppliquée e t l es m odifications apportées a u c ours de l 'exercice ;
iii. un é tat d es prêts et e mprunts c ontractés auprès d'entreprises affiliées au s ein
la s ignification de l 'article 19 a d u p résent c ode;
www.prc.cm
iv. u n é tat r écapitulatif d es t ransactions effectuées a vec des entreprises a ffiliées
au s ens d e l'article 1 9a d u présent c ode sans a pport d e c ontrepartie o u
avec une c ontrepartie non m onétaire ;
v. u n é tat r écapitulatif des t ransactions effectuées a vec des entreprises a ssociées au s ein d u
au sens de l 'article 19 a d u p résent Code, q ui f ont l'objet d 'un v irement a nticipé
accord de prix ou r escrit fiscal c onclu e ntre l 'entreprise associée
concerné p ar l'opération et l es a utorités f iscales d'un autre État ou t erritoire.
(3) D éfaut d e dépôt d e la d éclaration a nnuelle d e p rix dans le d élai p rescrit,
ou l e d épôt d 'une d éclaration i ncomplète ou n on c onforme s era p uni d'une
amende f orfaitaire t elle que prévue à l 'article M 1 04 ( 2) du M anuel d es procédures f iscales.
Article 1 8 c : ( 1) Toute entreprise é tablie a u C ameroun e st t enue de d époser, dans les douze (12)
mois s uivant l a c lôture d e l'exercice f iscal, par v oie é lectronique, une d éclaration p ays p ar p ays,
selon u n f ormat é tabli par l 'administration f iscale, c omprenant l a v entilation pays p ar p ays d es
bénéfices du groupe d 'entreprises m ultinationales auquel e lle appartient, a insi que l es données
fiscales e t c omptables et l es informations s ur l e l ieu où s 'exercent les activités des entreprises d u
groupe, l orsque :
a. e lle d étient d irectement ou indirectement d es a ctions d ans une o u plusieurs e ntreprises d e t elle s orte q u'elle est
tenus d e p réparer d es é tats f inanciers c onsolidés c onformément à
législation c omptable a pplicable, ou serait tenu d e l e f aire s i ses actions
étaient c otées à l a Bourse d es V aleurs Mobilières d e l’Afrique Centrale ( BVMAC) ;
9


b. e lle r éalise u n c hiffre d 'affaires a nnuel c onsolidé hors taxes d 'au moins 4 92 000 000 FCFA
000 ( quatre c ent q uatre­vingt­douze milliards) p our l'exercice financier précédant c elui
auquel s e r apporte l a d éclaration ;
c. a ucune autre entreprise n e d étient directement ou indirectement d 'actions dans l es s ociétés s usmentionnées
entreprise a u s ens du p oint a ) d u p résent p aragraphe.
(2) T oute e ntreprise é tablie au C ameroun répondant à l ’une des c onditions ci­dessous
sera é galement t enu d e d époser l e rapport prévu d ans l a présente section dans l es
délai e t c onformément a ux p rocédures e t au f ormat m entionnés c i­dessus :
a. elle e st détenue directement o u indirectement p ar u ne entreprise é tablie d ans u n É tat
qui n 'exige p as le dépôt d'une d éclaration pays par p ays, m ais qui serait t enue d e d époser u ne
telle d éclaration s i elle é tait é tablie au C ameroun ; o u •
b. e lle e st détenue directement o u i ndirectement p ar u ne entreprise é tablie d ans u n É tat
qui n e figure p as s ur l a liste prévue au p aragraphe 8 d u p résent a rticle m ais avec l aquelle le C ameroun a conclu u n a ccord
d'échange d e renseignements e n m atière f iscale.
(3) T oute e ntreprise é tablie au C ameroun détenue d irectement o u i ndirectement p ar u n
entreprise établie d ans u n É tat f igurant s ur l a l iste p révue à l 'article 18c
(8), q ui e st tenu d e d époser un r apport p ays p ar p ays en v ertu d e l a l égislation e n v igueur
en vigueur d ans c et État o u q ui s erait t enu d e d époser u n t el rapport s'il était
établie a u Cameroun, e st é galement t enue d e d époser l e rapport prévu à l 'article
Articlew 1 8c l orsqu'wil est i nforméw par l es a ut.oritéps f iscalesr d'unec défailla.nce c systémiqmue
l'État de résidence fiscale de l a s ociété q ui la détient d irectement o u i ndirectement.
(4) U ne e ntreprise é tablie au C ameroun, a utre que l'entité m ère ultime
d'un groupe d'entreprises multinationales, n e s ont pas t enus de d époser la d éclaration p ays
par ,p ,,ays r elative à une a nnée d'imposition en c as de d épôt d e s ubstitution d ans u ne autre
juridiction p ar l e groupe d 'entreprises multinationales, à c ondition q ue les c onditions suivantes
les c onditions c umulatives s ont r emplies p our c ette année d 'imposition :
­ l a j uridiction d e r ésidence f iscale de l'entité d éclarante exige le dépôt
d’un rapport p ays par pays s imilaire à c elui p révu d ans l a présente s ection ;
­ l a juridiction d e r ésidence f iscale de l 'entité d éclarante a c onclu un
accord a utorisant l'échange a utomatique d e d onnées p ays par p ays
rapports avec l e Cameroun q ui e st e n v igueur à l a date à l aquelle le
un rapport p ays par pays d oit être déposé ;
­ l a j uridiction d e r ésidence f iscale de l 'entité d éclarante n'a p as i nformé
Le Cameroun d ’une défaillance systémique ;
­ l e rapport p ays p ar pays e st échangé p ar l a j uridiction f iscale
résidence de l 'entité d éclarante au C ameroun ;
­ l a juridiction d e r ésidence f iscale de l'entité d éclarante a é té informée
par l 'entité constitutive résidant à d es f ins fiscales dans s a juridiction qui
ce d ernier a été désigné par le g roupe d 'entreprises m ultinationales pour
déposer le rapport p ays p ar pays e n s on n om ;
PRÉSIDENCE D E
PRÉSIDER
10


­ u ne notification d e l 'entité c onstitutive résidente f iscale d ans
Le C ameroun a été reçu p ar l es autorités fiscales, i ndiquant que
identité e t j uridiction d e résidence f iscale d e l'entité d éclarante.
(5) L orsque d eux ou p lusieurs e ntreprises établies au Cameroun appartenant à la
même g roupe d'entreprises m ultinationales remplissent u ne ou plusieurs d es c onditions v isées
aux sections Sc ( 2) et (3) c i­dessus, l'un d'eux p eut ê tre désigné par l e
groupe d 'entreprises m ultinationales à déposer l e r apport pays p ar p ays p révu
dans cette s ection, sous r éserve d 'informer les autorités fiscales que ce dépôt v ise à
remplir l 'obligation d e d éclaration i mposée à toutes l es entreprises de cette m ultinationale
groupe d 'entreprises é tabli a u Cameroun.
(6) L e c ontenu du r apport p ays p ar pays p révu a u présent a rticle doit
sont déterminées p ar a rrêté d u m inistre c hargé des finances.
(7) L e r apport p ays p ar pays p révu dans la présente s ection peut ê tre échangé
automatiquement a vec l es É tats o u territoires qui o nt conclu u n accord pour
cet e ffet a vec l e Cameroun.
(8) L a l iste d es États a yant c onclu un accord avec l e C ameroun
autorisant l'échange a utomatique d u rapport pays p ar p ays f ourni
car d ans la présente s ection s era d éterminée p ar a rrêté du ministre en charge de
finance.
(9) D éfaut d e dépôt, d épôt i ncomplet o u inexact d e la d éclaration p ays p ar p ays
rapport d ans le délai i mparti sera p uni d'une a mende forfaitaire comme p révu
www.prc.cm
car d ans l'article M 1 04 ( 2) d u MTP.
Article 1 8 d : ( 1) Les institutions f inancières e t o rganismes s imilaires, y compris l es banques et
établissements f inanciers, a insi que l es c ompagnies d ’assurance e t d e réassurance, s ont tenus
d’identifier l a résidence fiscale de tous les titulaires de comptes financiers. Ils d oivent é galement
identifier, de l a m anière requise, la résidence fiscale d es p ersonnes physiques q ui c ontrôlent ces
comptes, l e cas échéant.
(2) L es institutions f inancières et o rganismes similaires d oivent d ivulguer aux autorités fiscales,
au m oyen d'un r apport c onforme au modèle p rescrit par l 'impôt
autorités, t outes les i nformations n écessaires à la m ise e n œuvre d es c onventions
conclu p ar l e Cameroun a utorisant l 'échange a utomatique d 'informations sur
comptes f inanciers à des fins f iscales. I ls doivent é galement signaler toute a bsence d e
information.
Le r apport c ontient n otamment d es i nformations r elatives à l'identification des t itulaires d e comptes
financiers e t, l e c as é chéant, à celle des personnes p hysiques q ui l es contrôlent, a insi q ue des
informations f inancières relatives à ces comptes, n otamment les revenus de capitaux mobiliers, l es
soldes d e c omptes, l a valeur d e r achat d es contrats d 'assurance e t de rente, des o bligations ou
contrats de c apitalisation et d es p lacements similaires, ainsi q ue le p roduit des v entes ou des
rachats d'actifs f inanciers.
(3) L es institutions f inancières sont t enues d e conserver d es registres des mesures prises p our
satisfaire a ux o bligations v isées dans l a présente s ection, a insi q u'aux o bligations d'appui
documents, a utocertifications e t autres p reuves utilisées à cette f in, pour u n
période de 5 ( cinq) ans s uivant la fin d e la p ériode pendant l aquelle ils d oivent
fournir l es i nformations r equises.
PRÉSIDENCE D E
PRÉSIDER
11
AFFAIRES COLÈRE
VICE
C I EE c
_MOI
­­.;..;..;.:..:..:=­!_!AU


Article 18 e : À compter du 1 er janvier 2 025, l es personnes physiques o u m orales ouvrant d es
JE'
comptes financiers a uprès d'établissements financiers s ont t enues de p résenter u ne a uto­
certification é tablissant l eur r ésidence fiscale et, l e c as échéant, la r ésidence fiscale d es p ersonnes
physiques qui les c ontrôlent.
Article 18 f : ( 1) Lorsqu'une p ersonne é tablit u n m écanisme o u s e l ivre à u ne p ratique dont l e b ut
principal o u l'un d es buts principaux p eut r aisonnablement ê tre c onsidéré comme étant d e s e
soustraire à u ne o bligation i mposée par l es dispositions des a rticles 1 8e e t 1 8g c i­dessus ou l eurs
instruments d 'application, c es d ispositions s 'appliquent comme si la p ersonne n'avait p as é tabli le
mécanisme ou ne s 'était p as livrée à l a p ratique.
(2) L a notion d e « mécanisme » e st définie comme tout a rrangement, c ontrat, pratique,
transaction o u série d e t ransactions, sous quelque forme q ue c e s oit, comportant un o u p lusieurs
objectifs p rincipaux, d ont u n o u p lusieurs visent à é viter l'une des o bligations
imposées par les d ispositions d es articles 18f e t 1 8g c i­dessus o u l eurs m odalités d 'application
instruments.
Article 18 g : ( 1) Les renseignements r ecueillis par l 'administration f iscale a uprès d es o rganismes
visés à l 'article 1 8 d c i­dessus peuvent ê tre c ommuniqués a ux a utorités fiscales d es p ays ayant
conclu avec l e Cameroun d es conventions p ermettant l 'échange a utomatique de r enseignements
sur les c omptes financiers à d es fins f iscales.
(2) L es informations s ont d ivulguées c onformément aux c onditions p révues
dans les a ccords c onclus a vec l es p ays c oncernés.
www.prc.cm
Article 18 h : ( 1) Le n on­respect d es obligations d’identification e t de d éclaration prévues aux
articles 1 8 d e t 18 e e st p assible d ’une amende de 5 000 000 FCFA p ar c ompte. Cette sanction
s’applique é galement a ux déclarations t ardives, i ncomplètes, i nsuffisantes o u e rronées.
(2) L es p ersonnes p hysiques ou m orales q ui n e f ournissent pas a ux i nstitutions f inancières l es
l'auto­certification prévue à l 'article 1 8e e st p assible d 'une amende de 1 F CFA
millions p ar t itulaire de c ompte. L'autocertification d élibérée de d onnées erronées
informations f ournies par u n t itulaire d e c ompte o u u ne p ersonne p hysique c ontrôlant le c ompte
titulaire c onstitue u n f aux, s era p uni des peines prévues par l a
Code criminel.
(3) D éfaut d e conservation d es informations e t d ocuments prévus à l 'article 1 8 q uinquies
sera p uni d 'une a mende de 1 m illion d e F CFA p ar a n e t p ar compte assujetti
à signaler. Non­respect d e l a p ériode de c onservation prévue à l 'article
18 d é quivaut à u n d éfaut d e t enue de r egistres.
Article 18 i : Les modalités d e m ise en œ uvre d e l 'échange a utomatique d'informations prévu a ux
articles 18 quinquies et s uivants d u p résent C ode sont f ixées p ar v oie réglementaire.
DIVISION VIII
ÉVALUATION
Article 19.­ ( 1) Pour l 'assiette de l 'impôt s ur l es sociétés d û p ar l es sociétés q ui s ont c ontrôlées par,
ou qui c ontrôlent u ne e ntreprise é tablie a u C ameroun ou h ors d u C ameroun au s ens de l 'article 19
a d u présent code, l es b énéfices t ransférés i ndirectement à c ette d ernière p ar augmentation o u
diminution d u prix d 'achat o u d e v ente, o u p ar tout a utre m oyen,
12
Relations publiques A.
RE.P
­HER
TGENe ENTAIRc
ISUf.1f e r Aff"r­t­­c"'
1 ­ ­­ ­


seront i ncorporés aux r ésultats de c es e ntreprises. Les bénéfices indirectement t ransférés seront
évalués par comparaison avec ceux q ui auraient été r éalisés e n l 'absence d e d épendance o u d e
contrôle.
(2) L a condition d e d épendance o u d e c ontrôle v isée à l'article 1 9(1) n e d oit pas être
requis l orsque l e t ransfert a l ieu a vec d es e ntreprises :
­ établie o u résidente d ans u n É tat ou u n t erritoire c onsidéré c omme un p aradis fiscal au s ens d e
signification d e l'article 8 b (nouveau) d u présent C ode;
­ ou soumis à u n r égime f iscal préférentiel.
Les entreprises s ont c onsidérées c omme soumises à un r égime f iscal préférentiel d ans u n E tat o u
territoire s i e lles n 'y s ont p as i mposables, ou si l eur impôt s ur l e r evenu e st inférieur à la m oitié de
celui q u'elles a uraient p ayé au C ameroun s i e lles y é taient domiciliées ou é tablies.
(3) L es d ispositions d e l'article 1 9 (1) c i­dessus s'appliquent é galement aux t ransactions a vec d es s ociétés a ffiliées.
les e ntreprises au s ens d e l 'article 1 9a c i­dessous, établies a u C ameroun,
notamment l orsque c es d erniers sont b énéficiaires d ' u n i mpôt d érogatoire
régime ..................... (cid:0) ­­ ........... ( supprimé).
Article 1 9 a : D es r elations d e d épendance o u d e c ontrôle sont réputées exister entre deux
entreprises :
1. lorsque l 'une d étient directement o u p ar procuration 2 5 % du c apital social de l 'autre ou
www.prc.cm
exerce e ffectivement d es p ouvoirs de d écision dans l 'autre ; ou
Il. où les b ains s ont p lacés, d ans les c onditions définies a u p oint ( a) ci­dessus, s ous
le c ontrôle de la même e ntreprise ou d e l a même p ersonne.
DIVISION IX
PAIEMENT
Article 2 1 : ( 1) L'impôt s ur l es s ociétés e st payé à l'initiative d u c ontribuable a u p lus t ard l e 1 5 d u
mois s uivant, s elon l es m odalités ci­après :
Le reste restera inchangé.
(2) L 'acompte v isé à l 'article 2 1 ( 1) c i­dessus e st retenu à la s ource p ar
les c omptables p ublics e t les p ersonnes de s tatut é quivalent l ors du r èglement d es factures
payées p ar l e budget de l 'État, d es c ollectivités t erritoriales, des établissements p ublics a dministratifs
établissements, s ociétés publiques o u s emi­publiques, organismes à but n on lucratif ainsi
en t ant q u'entreprises d u s ecteur privé, dont l a l iste s era établie par v oie r églementaire.
Le r este restera inchangé.
(3) S ont s oumis à u ne r etenue à l a s ource :
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ,
,..._
PRÉSIDENCE DE LA
................................................ , W(cid:0)(cid:0)::...­7
PRESSIONS
s
AFFAIRES C(cid:0)RO !CE
13
ET
­­­­­­­....... DANS IEE COt!_F ­1 ..
R_u_e_\,;_,1,a.._­'


∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ,
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙;
Ne s ont p as s oumis à r etenue à l a s ource :
....................... ......................... ,
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ '
­ achats e ffectués par d es industriels enregistrés s ous r éserve de r evenus réels S ystème pour
exploitations
................................................... ( supprimé);
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ,
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ '
• • ••••• • •• • • ••• • •••• • • • ••••••••• • • • • ••• • ••••• • ••••• • • t
Le reste r estera inchangé.
DIVISION X
OBLIGATIONS D U CONTRIBUABLE
Article 2 2 : ( 1) Pour l e p aiement d es taxes perçues, l es i ndustriels, les i mportateurs, les g rossistes, les
demi­grossistes e t l es e ntreprises forestières d oivent :
www.prc.cm
Le reste r estera inchangé.
(3) Toute r etenue à l a s ource d éduite au t itre d e l 'impôt s ur l e revenu o u d e l a retenue à l a source
sur l es a chats donnent l ieu à l a d élivrance d 'un certificat d e r etenue à l a source. Ce
le certificat doit ê tre g énéré à p artir du s ystème i nformatique d es autorités f iscales.
CHAPTER Il
IMPÔT S UR L E R EVENU D ES PERSONNES PHYSIQUES
DIVISION 1 :
DISPOSITIONS G ÉNÉRALES
SOUS­DIVISION 1
PERSONNES IMPOSABLES
Article 25 : S ous r éserve des dispositions d es c onventions internationales e t de c elles de l 'article 27 c i­
dessous, l 'impôt sur l e r evenu d es p ersonnes p hysiques est d û p ar t oute personne p hysique ayant s a
résidence f iscale au Cameroun à r aison d e l'ensemble d e s on r evenu g lobal.
Le reste r estera i nchangé.
PRÉSIDENCE D U ROI
PRÉSIDENT
SE
SERV (cid:0)""'" ET
GLACE
MOI
PY
14


DIVISION L a
BASE D'ÉVALUATION
DE L 'IMPÔT SUR L E R EVENU DES P ERSONNES PHYSIQUES
SUS­DIVISION 1
SALAIRES, T RAITEMENTS, PENSIONS E T RENTES V IAGÈRES
li ­ D ÉTERMINATION DE LA BASE IMPOSABLE
Article 3 3= ( 1) Les avantages en nature s ont évalués selon le barème s uivant, a pplicable a u s alaire
brut i mposable :
.................. '
..................
,
..................
,
.. . ... . .. ....... ... ,
.................. '
.................. '
­ t éléphone .... 5 % ;
­ carburwant... 1 0 % ; ww.prc.cm
­ a gent d e s écurité 5 % ;
.. internet ...... 5 %.
Les a vantages en n ature n on é numérés au p aragraphe 1 c i­dessus sont évalués à l eur c oût réel.
(2) T oute allocation e n espèces r eprésentant des a vantages e n n ature d oit ê tre i ncluse dans l a base de c alcul.
l'évaluation d e s on montant r éel, à moins qu'ils ne soient spécifiquement e xemptés p ar u ne disposition c ontraire
disposition.
Article 3 4 : ( 1) Le r evenu net i mposable est déterminé en d éduisant d u m ontant b rut versé e t des
avantages e n n ature o u e n e spèces accordés, l es f rais professionnels c alculés au t aux fixe d e 3 0 % ,
ainsi que les cotisations v ersées à l'Etat et à l a Caisse n ationale d 'assurance sociale ( CNASS) au
titre d e l a retraite obligatoire.
(2) L e m ontant résultant d e l ’application d u taux f ixe p révu à l ’article
paragraphe 1 ci­dessus sera plafonné à 4 8 00 000 F CFA ( quatre millions huit cents
mille) par an.
SOUS­DIVISION La
REVENUS D ES ACTIONS E T DES PARTS
1 ­ R EVENU I MPOSABLE
Article 3 5 : L es capitaux suivants s ont imposés comme r evenus d'actions et de p arts
PRESSION 15
PRÉ
ATIF ET l'tEGL ET
mHlffi:Hl'Îti\ .oRY A ff AIRS CARO l D GLACE
DTICICC ... n.111: et


revenus produits d'actions, d e parts e t ( 1507)
similaires ;
(b) les revenus p rovenant d ’obligations;
(c) les r evenus provenant d ’actifs, d e dépôts, d e cautionnements e t d e comptes c ourants;
(1507) bénéfices p rovenant d u t ransfert d'actions, d'obligations e t d 'autres t ypes d 'actions
(1507) (e)les revenus p rovenant d’actifs numériques.
A­ Produits d es a ctions et revenus d 'actions considérés comme t els
Le reste r estera inchangé.
E. Revenus p rovenant d es actifs n umériques.
Article 4 2 a : L es m odalités d 'imposition d es revenus p rovenant d es a ctifs n umériques
sont f ixées p ar u n a cte séparé d u m inistre c hargé des f inances.
Ill. DÉTERMINATION DE LA BASE IMPOSABLE
Article 4 4 : Le r evenu imposable est é valué en f onction d e
1) .......... ...... .
2)
www.prc.cm
3) ................ .
4) ................ .
... ......... ∙∙∙∙∙
5)
(6) L es r evenus provenant d es t ransferts indirects v isés à l 'article 42 c i­dessus, p ar l 'intermédiaire
gain en capital obtenu lors d u transfert d es a ctions d e l'entité é trangère à
Capital d 'une s ociété c amerounaise.
Gains ou pertes enregistrés p our c haque opération d e t ransfert e ffectuée au c ours de l 'exercice financier
année s era évaluée par le d ifférentiel e ntre l e p rix de transfert du
titres concernés et leur prix d 'achat ou l eur valeur d 'octroi, en cas d e
l'acquisition d e tels t itres l ors de l a constitution d 'une s ociété ou lorsque
l'augmentation d u capital de l a société. L e m ontant à p rendre en compte
prix d e transfert afin d e d éterminer le g ain o u m oins ne d oit, e n a ucun c as
circonstance, ê tre inférieure à l a v aleur d es v aleurs t ransférées.
En c as d e pertes globales nettes e nregistrées a u c ours d'un e xercice, c es p ertes seront
être c ompensé p ar t out b énéfice n et global enregistré au c ours des q uatre prochains e xercices.
PRÉSION DE LA
PRÉSIDE NC
SE ET
FOIRES C AROi
∙ A VEC, ET
RUE
16


SUS­DIVISION V
BÉNÉFICES DES PRODUCTIONS A GRICOLES
1­ R EVENU IMPOSABLE
Article 53 : L es revenus perçus p ar l es agriculteurs, l es m étayers, les p etits e xploitants ( supprimé) o u par l es
propriétaires réels d 'exploitations agricoles sont considérés c omme des b énéfices a gricoles pour l 'évaluation
de l'impôt sur l e revenu d es personnes physiques.
SUS­DIVISION V I
BÉNÉFICES DES ACTIVITÉS NON COMMERCIALES
1­ REVENU IMPOSABLE
Article 56 : ( 1) S ont c onsidérés c omme g ains n on commerciaux ou a ssimilés, les r evenus p rovenant d es
professions l ibérales, d es fonctions p ubliques e t d es f iducies d étenues p ar d es p ersonnes s ans s tatut
commercial, l es r evenus n on salariaux d es sportifs e t d es a rtistes, a insi que t outes opérations, a ctivités
lucratives e t s ources d e g ain é trangères à t oute a utre c atégorie d e profit o u de r evenu.
(2) L es bénéfices comprennent n otamment :
a) les r evenus provenant d’opérations b oursières e ffectuées p ar d es p articuliers ;
(b) ........................................ ;
www.prc.cm
(h) l es r evenus g énérés s ur les p lateformes n umériques p ar d es p articuliers qui v endent d es b iens, f ournissent
services o u échanger o u p artager d es biens sur d e t elles plateformes.
SUS­DIVISION V II
DISPOSITIONS COMMUNES AUX SECTEURS A RTISANAL, I NDUSTRIEL, COMMERCIAL,
BÉNÉFICES AGRICOLES E T NON COMMERCIAUX
II­ CALCUL DES BÉNÉFICES D ES CONTRIBUABLES ASSUJETTIS
DANS L E CADRE DU SYSTÈME DE S ALAIRES R ÉELS
Article 6 5 a : Lorsqu'un c ontribuable a r éalisé, au cours d'un e xercice f inancier, u n r evenu q ui, p ar s a n ature,
ne peut l ui ê tre r endu d isponible a nnuellement e t q ue l e montant de c e r evenu s pécial excède l es r evenus n ets
moyens s ur la base desquels le c ontribuable é tait redevable de l'impôt s ur l e r evenu d es p ersonnes p hysiques
au titre des t rois a nnées p récédentes, l 'impôt dû p ar l 'intéressé est calculé en a joutant u n q uart d u r evenu
spécial net à son r evenu n et imposable e t en m ultipliant l 'impôt additionnel a insi obtenu p ar q uatre.
..
Lorsque le montant d es revenus exceptionnels e st supérieur au s euil de r evenu s oumis a u taux marginal de
l'impôt s ur le revenu d es personnes physiques, l 'impôt dû p ar l e contribuable est calculé sur l a base d u revenu
net i mposable g lobal, m ajoré d u revenu e xceptionnel net a près a battement d e 2 5 %.
Le r este r estera inchangé.
PRÉSIDENCE o
∙ PRÉS!
TAIR 17
TORY A FFAIRS C
, S ERVICE
TIFIEE C
AME
ED T RU py


DIVISION 1 11
CALCUL DE L 'IMPÔT
Article 7 0 : ( 1) Dans le cas p articulier des revenus p rovenant d 'actions e t de parts, u n taux fixe de 15
% e st a pplicable aux r evenus imposables.
(2) Toutefois, c e t aux est fixé à 10 % pour les r evenus et bénéfices non commerciaux
visé à l 'article 5 6 (2) d, e e t f. il e st réduit à 5 % p our l e revenu
visé à l 'article 5 6 (2) h.
DIVISION V I
PAIEMENT DES IMPÔTS
SOUS­DIVISION L a
REVENUS DES VALEURS MOBILIÈRES
Article 85 : ( 1) L'impôt s ur l e r evenu des personnes physiques p erçu s ur les plus­values mobilières
calculées conformément à l 'article 6 9 du présent C ode est retenu à l a s ource p ar l e p ayeur des produits
mentionnés a ux a rticles 3 5 et s uivants du p résent C ode. C e prélèvement donne lieu à la délivrance
d'une a ttestation d e retenue à la s ource, établie à partir d u système informatique d e l'administration
fiscale.
Le r este restera inchangé.
wwwSUS.­DIVIpSION I II :rc.cm
REVENUS I MMOBILIERS
Article 87 : U ne retenue à la s ource d e 15 % e st opérée s ur le r evenu foncier b rut c alculé
conformément aux d ispositions d e l'article 4 8 d u présent C ode.
La r etenue à l a s ource e st opérée exclusivement p ar l es administrations e t établissements p ublics, l es
collectivités e t l es e ntreprises individuelles imposées sous l e r égime du réel, du régime simplifié ou du
régime des o rganismes s ans b ut l ucratif ( OSBL).
Sont exonérés de la d éduction l es l oyers versés a ux entreprises évaluées s ur la b ase d es bénéfices
réels e t d épendant u niquement d es unités d e gestion s pécialisées.
La retenue à l a s ource est prélevée e xclusivement p ar l es administrations e t établissements p ublics,
les personnes m orales e t l es e ntreprises individuelles soumises a u régime de l'impôt s ur le r evenu réel,
au r égime fiscal simplifié ou au régime des organismes s ans b ut lucratif ( OSBL).
Article 88 : L a r etenue est effectuée p ar le p ayeur des loyers qui est tenu de verser l edit m ontant à son
Centre d es I mpôts, au plus t ard l e 1 5 du mois suivant le paiement effectif d es loyers.
La retenue à l a source sur l es l oyers d onne l ieu à la d élivrance d 'une a ttestation de retenue à la s ource
qui d oit ê tre générée à partir du s ystème informatique d e l'administration f iscale.
Article 9 0 : L es p lus­values visées à l'article 4 6 ( 2) sont soumises à un taux d'imposition d e 5 %, prélevé
par l e n otaire p our le c ompte du vendeur. Ce t aux est porté à 10 % l orsque l a transaction e st effectuée
en e spèces.
Toutefois, l ’acheteur peut é galement payer l ’impôt s ur les plus­values au nom du vendeur.
PRÉSIDENCE
18
PRÉSI
ETR CONCERNANT
ORY A FFAIRS C ARO VICE
IFIEE C O MOI
.


SUS­DIVISION I V :
ARTISANAT, I NDUSTRIEL, C OMMERCIAL,
BÉNÉFICES A GRICOLES E T NON C OMMERCIAUX
Article 92 : Les a comptes v isés à l 'article 91 ci­dessus sont retenus à la s ource par l es comptables
publics e t a ssimilés l ors d u r èglement des f actures p ayées s ur l e b udget d e l 'Etat, d es collectivités
territoriales d écentralisées, des é tablissements p ublics à caractère administratif, des sociétés
publiques o u s emi­publiques ainsi que des organismes sans b ut l ucratif e t d es entreprises d u secteur
privé, dont les l istes s ont fixées par v oie réglementaire.
Le r este r estera i nchangé.
Article 92 a : U n a compte de 5 % est p rélevé à la s ource par l 'Etat, l es collectivités t erritoriales, les
établissements publics administratifs, les e ntreprises publiques ou p arapubliques, l es entreprises
privées e t l es o rganismes s ans b ut lucratif ( OSBL) s ur l es honoraires, c ommissions et é moluments
versés a ux m embres des p rofessions l ibérales, quelle que s oit l eur f orme j uridique o u leur régime fiscal.
Le r este r estera i nchangé
Article 92 b (nouveau). L 'impôt dû e n vertu des dispositions d e l 'article 5 6 (2) d, e , f est retenu à la
source par l 'entité qui effectue le p aiement ou l'exploitant de l a p lateforme numérique.
www.prc.cm
Le m ontant retenu d oit être versé a u plus tard l e 1 5 du mois s uivant a u b ureau d es impôts compétent.
L'impôt d û c onformément a ux d ispositions d e l'article 5 6 (2) d, e , f , h est retenu à la s ource par l 'entité
effectuant l e p aiement.
Les s ommes a insi d éduites sont reversées au b ureau d es impôts local a u plus t ard l e 1 5 d u mois
suivant.
Article 93a A : L es r etenues à l a s ource o pérées a u titre de l'acompte d'impôt sur l e r evenu prévu aux
articles 92, 9 2a, 9 2 b ( nouveau), 93 e t 9 3a donnent lieu à la d élivrance d 'une attestation d e retenue
à la s ource q ui doit ê tre g énérée à p artir du système informatique de l'administration f iscale.
CHAPITRE I II
DISPOSITIONS G ÉNÉRALES ET C OMMUNES SUR
IMPÔT S UR LE REVENU DES SOCIÉTÉS E T D ES PERSONNES P HYSIQUES
DIVISION 1 :
SYSTÈMES FISCAUX
Article 93 t er : L es p ersonnes physiques o u morales s ont imposées selon l es régimes s uivants,
déterminés e n f onction du chiffre d 'affaires réalisé :
∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙∙∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙∙ ∙­­p(cid:0)R(cid:0)E(cid:0)s(cid:0),o(cid:0)E(cid:0)N(cid:0)C(cid:0)E(cid:0)o(cid:0)e1LlA(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)!(cid:0)(cid:0);(cid:0)
RÉCEPTEUR
RE
oOO O •• oo OOOQO o O 0 0 0 0 0 0 o oo o oo ■ ■0 o Oo • •••• )
deux fois
RME 19
PY


••• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • ••• 1
...................................... ,
­ C ontribuables n on p rofessionnels.
Article 93h : ( 1) Sont contribuables n on professionnels les p ersonnes q ui perçoivent uniquement des revenus
provenant d e salaires, t raitements, pensions, rentes v iagères e t/ou d e r evenus de c apitaux m obiliers e t de
revenus d e biens, e t en g énéral tout r evenu p assif.
(2) S ous réserve des exonérations prévues p ar l e présent Code, les p ersonnes s oumises a u r égime des
contribuables n on p rofessionnels s ont r edevables des impôts s uivants :
pour lesquels i ls s ont c ontribuables r éels o u s tatutaires :
­ e n leur q ualité d e c ontribuable effectif : impôt s ur le revenu d es personnes physiques dans les c atégories de
salaires e t traitements e t revenus f onciers, d roits d'enregistrement, impôt foncier
propriété e t impôt sur l a fortune immobilière ;
­ e n leur q ualité de contribuable légal : i mpôt spécial sur l e r evenu, retenues sur s alaire.
(3) L es c ontribuables n on professionnels s ont tenus de déposer u ne déclaration a nnuelle s ommaire
de leurs revenus conformément a ux d ispositions de l 'article 7 4a du présent C ode.
DIVISION I V
OBLIGATIONS DES PROPRIÉTAIRES D 'ENTREPRISE
www.prc.cm
Article 1 01.­ A vant l e 1 5 m ars de chaque année ou u n m ois avant l e départ du C ameroun d e
ses travailleurs salariés, t out chef d'entreprise d oit, s elon le modèle fourni par l'administration
fiscale, é tablir p our chaque travailleur une déclaration i ndividuelle sur l es sommes s uivantes
versées a u cours d e l'exercice é coulé :
a) .......................... .. '
b) ............................ ,
c) une l iste des a chats p ar fournisseur, i ndiquant leur numéro d'identification u nique e t
le m ontant des a chats d e l’exercice ;
d) une l iste des v entes p ar client, i ndiquant l eur numéro d'identification unique et l e
montant des v entes d e l 'exercice.
Article 1 03 : T oute i nfraction a ux d ispositions des a rticles 101 et 102 ci­dessus e st p assible
d'une amende d e 5 % du m ontant n on déclaré. Cette a mende est r ecouvrable a u m ême titre
que l es i mpôts prévus a ux c hapitres p récédents.
Le r este r estera i nchangé.
PRÉSIDENCE D E LA RÉPUBLIQUE
ic­.­:71
PRÉSIDENCE DE
SECR
SERVICE .. .._..., .. "
CE
L
Moi
et
20


PART I l
TAXE S UR L A VALEUR A JOUTÉE ET DROITS D'ACCISE
CHAPITRE I
CHAMP D 'APPLICATION
DIVISION I II
EXEMPTIONS
Article 1 28 : Sont exonérés d e l a t axe s ur la valeur a joutée :
(6) a­ les b iens e ssentiels énumérés à l'annexe 1 , n otamment :
• . ........................................ '
.
•
.
••• ••• ••• ••• • •• • •• • •• • •• • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••• • ••• 1
•
. ........................................ '
• . ... ..... .. .... .. ... .... ...... ... ... ..... .
b­ L'exemption prévue a u p aragraphe 6 (a) ci­dessus n e s 'applique pas a ux
produits suivants :
www.prc.cm
­ riz étuvé de l a s ous­position t arifaire 1006.30.90.200 ;
­ riz parfumé d e l a sous­position t arifaire 1006.30.90.300;
­ poissons d'ornement des sous­positions tarifaires 0 301.11.00.000, 0 301.19.00.000;
­ truites r éfrigérées d e l a sous­position t arifaire 0302.11.00.000;
­ saumon f rais ou r éfrigéré des sous­positions t arifaires 0 302.13.00.000, 0 302
.14.00.000, 0 302.19.00.000;
­ f oies et œufs e t laitances d e poissons de la s ous­position t arifaire 0302.91.00.000;
­ saumon c ongelé d es sous­positions t arifaires 0303.11.00.000, 0 303.12.00.000 e t
0303.13.00.000;
­ truites congelées d es sous­positions t arifaires 0 303.14.00.000 e t 0 303.19.00.000;
­ foies, œufs, nageoires, t êtes, queues, vessies n atatoires e t a utres a bats de p oissons comestibles
sous­positions t arifaires 0 303.91.00.000, 0303.92.00.000 et 0 303.99.00.000;
­ Figues et œufs de p oissons, séchés, f umés, s alés ou e n s aumure d e l a sous­position t arifaire
0305.20.00.000;
­ saumon s éché, salé ou e n s aumure d e l a s ous­position t arifaire 0305.41.00.000;
­ truites séchées, f umées, salées o u e n saumure d e l a sous­position t arifaire 0305.43 . 00.000;
­ morue de la s ous­position t arifaire 0305.62.00.000.
, ,
. ∙
PRÉSIDENT D E LARr ~ , .. ~ . ..... .. ­ •
PRÉSIDER .. ­(cid:0)∙∙(cid:0)(cid:0)­­::f'
0
RAI 21
S TROIS GL
RY AFFAIRS CEje
L~=~~ ~
CARO (cid:0) d::J(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)E(cid:0)Rrt'"TNl(cid:0)IEE CO ET
IFIÉ V RAI


CHAPTER Il
MÉTHODES D E CALCUL
DIVISION III
CALCUL
A­BASE D'ÉVALUATION
Article 141a ( nouveau) : D ans l e cas particulier des b oissons é numérées ci­dessous, l a b ase
d'imposition d es droits d'accise e st d éterminée après a pplication d 'un a battement de :
­ 1 0% pour les b oissons g azeuses ;
­ 10 % p our l es b ières d ont l e titre a lcoométrique e st i nférieur ou é gal à 5,5
................................................................. (supprimé).
8­TARIFS
Article 142 : ( 1) ................................................................................ ;
(6) a) L e t aux m oyen d es droits d 'accise s 'applique :
••• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• J
.......................................... ­­­ ...... '
••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• J
www.prc.cm
............ ... ...... ... ... ... ... ............ ... ... '
.............................. .....................
,,
­ c heveux, perruques, l aine, b arbes, s ourcils, cils, mèches et a utres matières textiles
importés pour la f abrication d e perruques o u d 'articles similaires e n c heveux d e p ositions tarifaires
6703 à 6704;
................................................... '
• • •••••• • •••••••••••••••••• • • ••••••••••••••• • •• • • • •• J
......... .............................................. '
••• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••••• f
­ les h uiles v égétales r affinées i mportées sous l es sous­positions t arifaires 1507.90.00.000,
1508.90.00.000, 1 509, 1510.90.00.000, 1 511.90.00.000, 1512.19.00.000, 1512.29. 00.000,
1513.19.00.000, 1 513.29.00.000, 1 514.19.00.000, 1 515.30.00.000, 1 514.99.00.000,
1515.29.00.000, 1 515.50.00.000, 1 515.90.00.000 e t 1 516.20.00.000; 1515.19.00.000,
­ les fèves d e cacao importées, y c ompris celles d estinées à être utilisées comme m atières p remières
de l a position t arifaire 1 801;
­ aliments i mportés p our c hiens ou chats d e l a s ous­position t arifaire 2 309.10.00.000;
­ charbon de bois i mporté de l a p osition t arifaire 4402.
b) Le t aux r éduit de d roits d'accise s 'applique :
PRESSION
PRÉS 22
ATlf A R EG
COLÈRE
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)rï,ïirê(cid:0)mi AFFAIRESCARO lij GLACE
­­­ •­•­­ l _!!.Çf>tif
ET


•••••••••••••••••••....•..•••...................... '
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '
.
• • ■ ■ ■ • • • ■■ ■ • ■ • •• • • ■ ■ •• ■ • • • •• • • • • • ■ • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• ...
•••••••..•••.••••.................................. '
.
••••••••.•••••....•••..•.•..........•........ '
.
.......•................•.•.............. '
.
...........•..............•............... ,
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
J
­ produits céréaliers importés ( corn flakes) e t p réparations a limentaires obtenues
à partir d e f locons d e c éréales i mportés d es s ous­positions t arifaires 1904.10.00.000 e t
1904.20.00.000.
Le reste r estera inchangé.
C ­ D ÉDUCTIONS
Article 143 : ( 1) La t axe sur l a valeur a joutée p erçue en a mont sur l e prix d 'une opération
imposable e st d éductible d e l 'impôt applicable à c es o pérations, e n c e q ui c oncerne l es
assujettis enregistrés e t établis s ur l a base d es b énéfices r éels, de l a manière s uivante :
www.prc.cm
(a) L a taxe sur la v aleur a joutée q ui a été appliquée a u p rix d'une transaction i mposable d oit
être déductibles a u cours du m ois correspondant.
(b) P our être déductible, l a taxe sur la valeur ajoutée doit a pparaître :
­ s ur u ne f acture d ûment émise via le s ystème d e suivi de f acturation électronique d e l 'administration f iscale par un
fournisseur enregistré, inscrit a u dossier du contribuable actif au m oment d e l a facturation, qui est
évalué sur la b ase d es g ains réels e t portant s on n uméro d'identification unique.
Toutefois, c es conditions ne s’appliquent p as aux fournisseurs à l ’étranger ;
Le reste r estera inchangé.
(2) ...... ......................... .......... .
(3) ............ ...... ....................... .
(4) ......................................... .
Les r etenues à l a s ource d e l a T VA s ont e ffectuées sur p résentation d e l 'attestation d e r etenue
à la s ource d élivrée p ar l 'entité h abilitée à r etenir les t axes à l a s ource v ia l e s ystème
informatique d e l 'administration fiscale.
Toute a ttestation d e r etenue à l a s ource d élivrée e n d ehors du s ystème informatique de
l'administration f iscale n e d onne p as d roit à d éduction d e l a T VA.
PRESSION D
PRÉSI
ET
GLACE
MOI
PY 23


CHAPITRE III
RÈGLES D E P ROCÉDURE
DIVISION 1
MODE DE P AIEMENT DE L A T AXE
Article 1 49 : ( 1) ..................................................... .
(2) P our l es f ournisseurs d e l'État, d es collectivités t erritoriales, des établissements p ublics a dministratifs
établissements e t entreprises publiques et semi­publiques, e t certains d u secteur p rivé
sociétés d ont l es l istes sont établies p ar voie réglementaire, la t axe s ur la v aleur ajoutée e st
déduit à l a source l ors du règlement d 'une f acture e t transféré a u bureau d es impôts ou,
sinon, au bureau comptable t erritorialement compétent, sous la m ême
conditions et d élais applicables a ux autres t ransactions. Ces déductions doivent
concernent à l a fois l es factures initiales e t les n otes de crédit relatives a ux réductions commerciales .
la d éduction a insi e ffectuée d onnera l ieu à l a délivrance d'un certificat d e déduction
à la s ource q ui d oit ê tre g énérée à partir d u s ystème informatique d e l'administration f iscale.
Le reste restera inchangé.
(4) A ucune d emande d e remboursement o u de compensation d e l a t axe sur l a v aleur a joutée n e p eut être p résentée s ur l a base
sur l es r ecettes des p aiements en espèces.
www.prc.cm
Ils seront remboursables :
­ d ans un délai de trois m ois a ux entreprises ayant un statut de c rédit structurel e n r aison de
retenue d'impôt à la s ource.
Toute attestation d e retenue à la s ource d élivrée en dehors d u système i nformatique d e l'administration
fiscale n e donne pas droit à r emboursement.
Le reste r estera inchangé.
ANNEXES À LA PARTIE II
ANNEXE I l : LISTE DES PRODUITS SOUMIS A UX D ROITS D 'ACCISE
Numéro d e rubrique Description du tarif
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙
...................... ...... ..... ....... .....
6703. à 6 704 Cheveux, p erruques, laine, barbes, sourcils, c ils, m èches et autres m atières
textiles i mportées p our l a f abrication d e p erruques o u d 'articles s imilaires en
cheveux humains
.......................
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ­ .
................. ... . ..... ...... ...... .....
∙•­:­:­:.­:(cid:0):­=..,.."7
PRÉSIDENCE DE
PRÉSIDER
24
Par F AIRS CARO GLACE
IEE CO
ET
VRAI


4421.20.00.000 e t
Cercueils en bois e t a utres articles e n b ois i mportés
4421.99.00.900
9403.10.00.000 Mobilier m étallique i mporté des types utilisés dans l es b ureaux
9403.40.00.000 Meubles en bois i mportés des types utilisés dans l es c uisines
9403.70.00.000 Meubles en plastique importés
1904.10.00.000 et les produits à base d e c éréales importés (corn f lakes) et l es préparations a limentaires
1904.20.00.000 obtenues à partir de flocons d e c éréales importés
1507.90 0 0 000, 1509.20 00 h uiles végétales raffinées importées 0 00, 1 5.09.20
00 000, 1508.90 00 0 00, 1509. 90 0 0
000, 1510.90 00 0 00, 1511.90 00 0 00,
1512.19 0 0 000, 1 512.29 00 0 00,
.
1513.19 0 0 000, 1513.29 00 0 00,
1514.19 0 0 000, 1514.99 00 0 00,
1515.19 00 000, 1 515.29 00 0 00,
1515,30 0 0 000, 1 515,60 00 0 00,
1515,90 00 000;
je
je
1602.20.10.000 Saucisse industrielle i mportée, à l'exclusion des abats, déjà qui s ont
soumise à un droit d 'accise au taux de 2 5 %
1801
fèves de cacao i mportées, y compris celles d estinées à ê tre utilisées c omme m atières premières
matériels
www.prc.cm
2309.10.00.000 aliments importés pour c hiens et c hats
4402 charbon de b ois i mporté
0901.11.12.000 à 0901.11.19; c afé i mporté 0 90111 22 à
0901.11.49.000 ; 0 9011.11.52.000 à
090112.00.000; 0 901.21.00.000
0901.22.00.000;
2101 et
PARTIE I V
DIVERS I MPÔTS E T D ROITS
CHAPITRE I II
IMPÔT S PÉCIAL SUR L E REVENU
Article 2 25.­ ( 1) S ous r éserve des conventions f iscales i nternationales, i l e st institué u n i mpôt spécial sur
les r evenus a ttribués a ux personnes p hysiques ou m orales d omiciliées hors du C ameroun, p ar l es
personnes p hysiques o u m orales situées au C ameroun, l 'État o u l es c ollectivités territoriales d écentralisées
au t itre :
Le r este r estera i nchangé.
Article 2 26.­ P our être i mposables, l es produits ci­dessus sont i mposables l orsqu'ils sont v ersés p ar
des p ersonnes p hysiques ou m orales situées a u C ameroun, par l 'État ou l es c ollectivités t erritoriales
décentralisées à des personnes n'ayant p as d 'établissement stable o u p ermanent a u C ameroun,
ou l orsqu'ils s ont p ris en c ompte comme c harges d éductibles p our le c alcul d e l'impôt sur le revenu.
PRESIOENC 25
EPUBLI e P RES y DE
LA
REP LIC E CRETA NE A l.
LEGISLATIF ET R GLEMENTAIRE
ISLATIYE E T
(cid:0)ftDIS: renA .F. F• ­A­•I­R­ ­E .S. _S _TATUTAIRES C A l(cid:0)OEX SERVICE


les r ésultats d u p ayeur. L orsque la d éduction d e ces p roduits à titre d e charges n 'est p as a utorisée, ils
sont c onsidérés c omme d es b énéfices d istribués e t i mposés e n conséquence.
PARTIE IV
FISCALITÉ SPÉCIALE
CHAPITRE I
PRODUITS PÉTROLIERS T AXON S PÉCIAUX
Article 2 31 : L es taux d e l a t axe s péciale s ur les p roduits pétroliers s ont l es s uivants :
••• • •• • ••••• ••• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • •• • 1
­ 60 f rancs p ar mètre c ube pour l e g az n aturel à u sage industriel.
CHAPITRE II
DISPOSITIONS R ELATIVES AU S ECTEUR M INIER
Article 2 39b : ( 1) L es d roits f ixes pour l 'octroi, l e r enouvellement o u le t ransfert d e tous titres miniers, l es
redevances a nnuelles s uperficiaires, la t axe a d valorem, la t axe d 'extraction s ur l es p roduits d e carrière
et l es r edevances s ur l a p roduction des e aux de source, d es e aux minérales e t d es e aux thermos sont
payés e xclusivement a u r eceveur d es i mpôts compétent.
Toutefois, l a t axe a d v alorem s ur l es s ubstances m inérales e t l 'impôt s ur l es s ociétés d us p ar l es s ociétés
exerçawnt u ne activitwé minière a rtiwsanale peu ou. sempi­mécanisrée pecuvent ê tre. percçus en namture p ar
prélèvement s ur la p roduction b rute desdites s ociétés. U n a rrêté du ministre c hargé d es f inances
détermine les c onditions d 'enregistrement d es perceptions e n nature.
Le m inistre des F inances p eut, l e c as échéant, a utoriser t out o rganisme ou entité c hargé d e la s upervision
des a ctivités m inières à a ssister l 'administration f iscale dans la p erception en nature d e la t axe a d valorem
sur l es s ubstances minérales e t de l 'impôt s ur les s ociétés.
Les m odalités d 'application d e l a p résente a utorisation seront fixées conjointement p ar l es m inistres
chargés d es finances et des m ines.
Le reste r estera i nchangé.
PARTIE VI
ENREGISTREMENT, DROIT D E TIMBRE E T C URATELLE
CHAPITRE X IV
TIMBRE E T D ROIT D E TIMBRE
DIVISION I II
TIMBRE S UR L 'ÉMISSION D E CERTAINS D OCUMENTS ET O BJETS D IVERS
G ­ TIMBRE S PÉCIFIQUE S UR C ERTAINS DOCUMENTS
Article 470a : R éclamations c ontentieuses e t n on contentieuses, demandes d e sursis d e paiement, d emandes
d'indemnisation, d e r emboursement ou d e restitution d 'impôts, demandes d e __ P_R_e(cid:0)s ­ ­,o(cid:0)e ... N∙c=­=­e ­ =­o=­:­::­:
• ­ ­­­­­­­(cid:0)(cid:0).
PRES
26
ETR ET
AFFAIRES CARO GLACE
IEE QQ ET
_


Les incitations et r éductions fiscales, l es d emandes d'opérations f iscales et l es d emandes d'agréments
ou d 'autorisations d e toute n ature sont s oumises à u n droit d e timbre spécifique.
SUB­PART Il
LÉGISLATION N ON H ARMONISÉE D ANS L A ZONE C EMAC
CHAPITRE I
TAUX DES DROITS D 'ENREGISTREMENT
DIVISION 1
TÂCHES P ROPORTIONNELLES
Article 5 43 : S ont s oumis à :
(a) l e t aux é levé d e 15 % :
Les a ctes et transferts d 'entreprises p révus à l 'article 341(1) d u présent C ode, à l 'exception d es b iens n eufs, qui
sont soumis a u taux réduit d e 2% lorsque les conditions p révues a udit a linéa s ont
remplies .......................................................................................... ( supprimé).
(b) l e taux i ntermédiaire d e 10 % :
­ a ctes et transferts de domaines u rbains b âtis ;
­ l ews i nstruments we t t ransferts p rwévus à l 'article .3 41 (p2) du présernt C odce, à l 'exclu.sion c des b aux m
de bâtiments dans l es z ones rurales à des fins c ommerciales ;
­ l es t ransferts d’usage des fonds d e commerce e t d es clients ;
­ l es actes et transferts d 'entreprises p révus à l 'article 341(1) d u présent C ode,
à l'exclusion d es biens n eufs, qui s ont s oumis au taux réduit de 2 % l orsque les conditions
énoncées d ans ledit paragraphe s ont r emplies.
(c) I nchangé.
(d) I nchangé.
(e) le t aux s uper­réduit d e 1 % :
­ l es instruments e t t ransferts p révus à l'article 3 44 ci­dessus. T outefois, en ce qui c oncerne
mainlevée d es hypothèques, l 'impôt calculé s era r éduit des t rois quarts ;
­ n onobstant l es dispositions de l'article 3 44 du présent C ode, les instruments et
transferts d e biens à d es associations reconnues d 'utilité p ublique e t
organismes c onfessionnels d ûment a utorisés.
Le r este r estera i nchangé.
DIVISION V
ÉVALUATIONS ADMINISTRATIVES
Article 546a : ( 1) N onobstant l es dispositions d es articles 324 et 3 25 supra, l'estimation ayant
servi d e b ase à la p erception d u droit p roportionnel, p rogressif ou dégressif s ur les b iens
meubles o u i mmeubles cédés en propriété, e n usufruit o u en possession n e p eut être
inférieure à celle r ésultant de l 'application du tarif o fficiel.
27
PRÉ
TGEN
LÉGISLATIVE ET TAIR
VOITURE R Y'AFFAIRS SERVICE


∙ Dans l e c as particulier des t ransmissions résultant d 'une succession, d 'un partage, d 'une mainlevée
copropriété et d onations e ntre v ifs en l igne d irecte et e ntre époux, l a
la v aleur utilisée c omme b ase p our l e c alcul des droits d'enregistrement s era d éterminée p ar
en appliquant u ne r emise d e 50 % sur la v aleur résultant d e l'application d u p rix o fficiel
liste.
Le r este r estera inchangé.
DIVISION VI
RÉPARTITION DES T ÂCHES
Article 546b : N onobstant l es dispositions des articles 3 04, 3 12 e t 3 13 d u présent C ode, l e montant du
droit d 'enregistrement p our un bail e mphytéotique p eut ê tre f ractionné e n autant d e versements q u'il y a
de périodes d e trois a ns d ans la d urée du b ail.
Article 546c : ( 1) L orsque le p aiement d es droits est fractionné en t ranches, l a formalité d 'enregistrement
est accordée a u fur e t à m esure du paiement d es tranches e t p our l e montant de chaque t ranche.
(2) Non­respect p ar le c ontribuable d es modalités d e paiement
en plusieurs versements i nvalidera les v ersements a ccordés e t r endra l e montant
des d roits restant d us i mmédiatement exigibles, s ans p réjudice d es pénalités de r etard
d'un d evoir s upplémentaire.
wwwC.HAPpTER I l rc.cm
TAUX D ES DROITS DE TIMBRE
DIVISION L a
DROITS D E TIMBRE S PÉCIAUX PAYABLES SUR CERTAINS DOCUMENTS ET A UTRES FRAIS
F­ TIMBRE SUR LES C ONTRATS DE T RANSPORT
Article 556 : Le timbre sur les contrats d e t ransport est fixé comme suit :
1 ) ................................ ;
.
2) ∙∙∙∙∙­­∙­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­∙­­­­­­­­ ,
3) 10 000 FCFA par connaissement pour le transport de marchandises par v oie a érienne.
Les d roits de timbre s ur les contrats d e transport sont acquittés p ar le transporteur e xclusivement au
bureau des r ecettes de son centre d e t axation. Dans l e cas des contrats d e transport aérien, les d roits de
timbre sont perçus par la s ociété d e c ourrier express.
SUS­PARTIE III
CODE NON H ARMONISÉ EN Z ONE C EMAC
CHAPITRE V
DROIT DE T IMBRE SUR L ES V ÉHICULES À MOTEUR
Article 598 : Le droit de timbre sur les v éhicules a utomobiles est perçu par les c ompagnies d'assurances
lors d e la souscription d'une p olice d'assurance r esponsabilité civile.
PRÉSIDENCE D
PRÉS
28
AIRE
ORY AFFAIRS • S ERVICE
IFEE C RME
D V RAI PY


Les s ociétés d 'assurances perçoivent l e droit de t imbre sur l es véhicules automobiles au t aux visé à
l'article 5 97 c i­dessus d ès l e p remier paiement d e l a prime d'assurance a u c ours de l 'année, qu'il soit
partiel o u t otal.
La p erception d u d roit d e t imbre s ur l es véhicules a utomobiles est s ubordonnée à la d élivrance d'un reçu
par l a c ompagnie d'assurance, g énéré p ar l e système informatique d e l 'administration fiscale.
Le r este r estera i nchangé.
Article 5 98a : S ous p eine d e l 'amende prévue à l 'article M 104 d u M anuel d es procédures f iscales, les
sociétés d'assurances s ont t enues d e j oindre à l eur déclaration a nnuelle u n fichier d e l eurs intermédiaires
.
précisant l eur n om o u r aison s ociale, l eur numéro d 'identification u nique, l eur adresse et l eur l ocalisation.
Le d éfaut d 'émission d 'un c ertificat de p aiement du d roit de t imbre sur les véhicules automobiles dans le
système informatique d e l 'administration f iscale est p assible d u paiement d e l'amende p révue à l'article
M 1 04(1) d u M anuel d es p rocédures f iscales.
Article 6 01 : L e défaut d e j ustification du p aiement d u d roit de t imbre sur les véhicules automobiles par l a
présentation d 'un c ertificat d e p aiement d udit d roit de timbre généré par le système informatique d e
l'administration f iscale a ux a gents d e c ontrôle h abilités constitue u ne infraction d e d euxième classe,
punie p ar l 'article 3 62(b) d u C ode p énal.
LIVRE D EUX
MANUEL DES P ROCÉDURES FISCALES
www.prc.cm
CHAPITRE UNIQUE
OBLIGATIONS DES CONTRIBUABLES
DIVISION 1
OBLIGATION D E D ÉPÔT DES DÉCLARATIONS
SUS­DIVISION 1
PRINCIPE G ÉNÉRAL
Article L 1 : T oute p ersonne p hysique ou m orale redevable, e n q ualité d e c ontribuable l égal o u e ffectif,
du p aiement d 'un i mpôt, d 'un droit o u d'une t axe ou d 'un acompte de ceux­ci, en v ertu d es dispositions
du C ode g énéral d es i mpôts, d oit déposer u ne d emande d 'immatriculation a uprès d e l 'administration
fiscale c ompétente d e s on ressort, d ans les 15 (quinze) jours o uvrables suivant l e début d e s es activités,
et j oindre à c ette demande u n plan d 'implantation, l es r éférences d 'abonnement de l 'entreprise d e
distribution p ublique d 'eau ou d'électricité, s elon le c as, l e n uméro de téléphone e t une a dresse
électronique v alide.
Une f ois l a p rocédure d'enregistrement t erminée, un r eçu d 'enregistrement i ndiquant l e n uméro
d'identification u nique d u c ontribuable, l e s ystème fiscal e t l e centre d 'enregistrement s era d élivré a u
contribuable p ar l 'autorité fiscale.
Le r este r estera inchangé.
Article M 2 : ( 1) T oute p ersonne p hysique o u morale redevable e n t ant que c ontribuable l égal d u paiement
d'un i mpôt, d 'un d roit o u d 'une t axe ou d 'un a compte de c eux­ci, ou d ésignée pour effectuer u ne r etenue
à l a s ource e n v ertu d es l ois e t r èglements, e st tenue d e déposer d es déclarations, y compris la
Déclaration s tatistique e t fiscale ( DSF), e n u tilisant l es formulaires officiels f ournis p ar
PRÉSIDENT
PRÉ 29
ATIF E T AIR
R G RT AFFAIRS
et R .CARO Tls:'lla: ,__,. ERVJCE


l'administration fiscale c amerounaise, a ccompagnée d es pièces annexes o bligatoires, d ans les d élais prévus
par la loi.
(2) Les déclarations v isées a u p aragraphe 1 c i­dessus doivent ê tre d éposées par voie é lectronique.
cas, l 'avis d'imposition g énéré servira d e base au paiement de la
droits e t taxes correspondants.
(3) Toutefois, les entreprises r elevant d e la compétence d'une u nité d e gestion spécialisée d oivent
être t enus d e d époser leur déclaration d e r evenus e t l eurs s tatistiques e xclusivement e n u tilisant le système électronique
système informatique m is e n place p ar l 'administration f iscale.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .­...... (supprimé).
Article L 2fal : (1) N onobstant l es dispositions r elatives au régime de déclaration, l'Administration f iscale peut
adresser à toute p ersonne p hysique ou morale r edevable d 'un i mpôt, d 'un d roit o u d'une t axe c onformément
aux lois et règlements e n v igueur, e n cas d'absence ou d'insuffisance m anifeste de déclaration, une déclaration
pré­remplie des recettes p erçues ou d e tout a utre é lément imposable, assortie d u montant d e l'impôt d û.
Le r este r estera i nchangé.
Article M 2b : . ( 1) L es contribuables à j our sont i nscrits au registre d es c ontribuables actifs de la Direction
Générale d es Impôts.
Les contribuables nouvellement inscrits s eront i nscrits d ans la base de données d es c ontribuables actifs à
compter d e l a d ate d e d épôt d e l a première d éclaration f iscale.
www.prc.cm
En cas d e d éfaut d e d éclaration d 'un contribuable p endant d eux m ois consécutifs, ce dernier e st
automatiquement radié d e l adite base. L a radiation a utomatique i ntervient dès l e premier défaut d e déclaration
annuelle d u c ontribuable n on p rofessionnel. I l n e peut y ê tre r éintégré qu'après r égularisation de sa situation
fiscale.
(2) Aucun contribuable p rofessionnel ne p eut effectuer d es opérations d 'importation ou d'exportation s ans ê tre
inscrit au r egistre d es contribuables a ctifs d e la D irection g énérale d es i mpôts e t
ne p ossède p as de c ertificat de c onformité fiscale.
SUBDIVISION Il
AVIS D E D ÉPÔT DE LA D ÉCLARATION
Article M 3 : Tout c ontribuable q ui n 'a pas déposé s a déclaration d ans l e délai p révu p ar la loi r eçoit u ne lettre
de r appel. I l d ispose alors d 'un délai d e sept ( 7) jours p our régulariser s a situation, à c ompter d e la
réception d e c ette l ettre, le cachet d e la poste o u le bordereau d e dépôt s igné, e n cas d e remise en main
propre, f aisant foi.
Le r este restera inchangé.
DIVISION La
OBLIGATION D E CONSERVATION D ES D OCUMENTS ET D URÉE D E C ONSERVATION
Article M Sa : N onobstant les dispositions d e l'article M 6 d u présent Code e t s ous p eine d 'application d e la
peine p révue à l'article M 1 04 ( 2) d u Manuel d e
Procédures f iscales, le contribuable e st tenu de transmettre s pontanément à s on c entre des impôts d ans un
∙
..
délai d e 1 5 ( quinze) j ours :
­(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)i7(cid:0)­
PRESSION
PRÉ
3o
ATIF ET ET
Affaire A IRS C (cid:0)R RVICE
IEE C O MOI
VRAI


­ l es r apports d u commissaire a ux comptes, dès q ue l a société e n a été i nformée ;
­ l es i nventaires, d ûment s ignés e t p araphés, à compter d e l a date à laquelle i ls o nt é té d ressés
déposés a ux greffes d es tribunaux.
DIVISION IV
OBLIGATIONS A DMINISTRATIVES
Article M S a : ( 1) L a facturation d es entreprises e t l 'établissement d es factures f ont l'objet d'un s uivi
électronique p ar l 'administration f iscale d ans d es conditions fixées p ar arrêté d u m inistre chargé des
finances.
Ceci s 'applique e n particulier a ux entreprises du s ecteur d es technologies d e l 'information et d e la
communication ( TIC), du c ommerce e n l igne, d e l 'électricité, d es jeux de h asard et d e d ivertissement,
des assurances, d es boissons, d es produits o léagineux et d es bouquets n umériques, ainsi qu'à
toutes l es e ntreprises relevant d e l 'entité c hargée d e l a gestion des grandes e ntreprises d e
l'administration f iscale.
Pour m ettre en œuvre l e s ystème d e s uivi électronique de l a facturation des entreprises e t d e l a
production d es factures, l 'administration f iscale peut recourir à des experts e xternes dans l es
conditions f ixées p ar a ccord entre les p arties.
(2) Q uel que soit l eur s tatut o u l eur n ature, les sociétés sont tenues d e s e conformer aux
système d e s urveillance électronique v isé au p aragraphe ( 1) c i­dessus.
Sans p réjudice d u recouvrement d es i mpôts éludés, ainsi que des p énalités e t sanctions p énales prévues
www.prc.cm
aux a rticles M 1 08 e t s uivants d u Manuel des p rocédures fiscales, le non­respect des o bligations r elatives
au s ystème d e f acturation électronique o u de suivi de l a p roduction e st p assible d 'une a mende é gale à :
• la v aleur d es factures en q uestion, dans l e cas d'une facture électronique
surveillance;
• la v aleur d e production d issimulée d u f ait d e la violation, dans l e cas de
surveillance é lectronique d e la p roduction.
Le r este restera inchangé.
SUB­PART Il
CONTRÔLE FISCAL
CHAPITRE I
DROIT D E CONTRÔLE
DIVISION I II
CONDITIONS D 'EXERCICE D U D ROIT DE C ONTRÔLE
SOUS­SECTION 1
CONTRÔLE SUR PLACE
Article L 1 3 nouveau : ( 1) A u m oins 15 ( quinze) j ours avant la date prévue p our l a première
intervention, l 'administration fiscale a dresse, par lettre r ecommandée o u p ar remise e n m ain propre
PRÉSIDEZ p
31
Tif IEO T R ∙ 1.IRE ,SERVICE R ME P Y


accusé d e r éception o u par b ordereau d e décharge, u n avis d e vérification c omptable ou une v érification
de l a s ituation f iscale g lobale.
Mention d oit ê tre f aite d ans l 'avis d e révision, sous p eine d e nullité de celui­ci, de la possibilité :
­ être a ssisté p ar u n conseiller f iscal a gréé C EMAC i nscrit à l 'ordre ou un
centre d e gestion agréé d e leur choix ;
­ consulter l a charte d u contribuable c ontrôlé sur le site internet d e l'administration fiscale.
Le r este r estera inchangé.
Article L 1 9 b is ( nouveau) : ( 1) Les e ntreprises é tablies a u Cameroun e t q ui d épendent o u contrôlent
des e ntreprises s ituées a u Cameroun ou hors du Cameroun, a u sens d e l'article 1 9 bis du présent
Code, e t q ui r emplissent l 'une des c onditions ci­après énoncées, d oivent mettre à l a disposition de
l'administration f iscale, à la date de début d u c ontrôle c omptable, sous f ormat électronique, l es
documents leur p ermettant d e justifier l a politique d e prix d e transfert a ppliquée d ans l es transactions
de t oute n ature réalisées a vec d es e ntreprises affiliées é tablies a u Cameroun o u hors d u Cameroun a u
sens de l 'article 1 9 bis du présent Code :
­ avoir un chiffre d'affaires annuel h ors t axes ou u n a ctif brut dont le m ontant e st é gal ou s upérieur
plus d e 1 0 00 000 0 00 F CFA (un m illiard) ; ou
­ d étenir d irectement o u indirectement, à l a clôture d e l'exercice, p lus d e 25 % d u capital
cawpital ou d roitsw de vote d 'unwe entreprise é.tablipe au Camerroun o cu à l'étra.ngercm
Cameroun dont le chiffre d'affaires annuel hors t axes ou le p atrimoine b rut est supérieur ou
égal à 1 000 0 00 000 (un m illiard) de f rancs C FA.
Le r este r estera inchangé.
DIVISION V
LIMITES D U D ROIT DE C ONTRÔLE
Article M 4 1 ( a) ­ ( 1) Nonobstant les d ispositions d es articles M 9 , M 1 0, M 1 1, M 1 2, M 1 6 et M 2 1 du
Manuel d es p rocédures fiscales, u n contribuable p eut ê tre e xempté d'un contrôle fiscal au titre d 'un
exercice f iscal d onné s i, à la fin dudit e xercice, il p résente u n taux d'augmentation d es impôts e t t axes
payables s ur u ne base v olontaire d'au m oins 2 5 % par rapport à l 'exercice p récédent.
Le r este restera inchangé.
SOUS­PARTIE I II
COLLECTE D ES IMPÔTS
CHAPITRE I
MÉTHODES D E C OLLECTE
DIVISION La
AVIS D 'ÉMISSION P OUR C OLLECTE
Article M 5 3 : ( 1) L'avis d 'émission p our recouvrement c onstitue u n acte e xécutoire pour le recouvrement
•'
intégral d es i mpôts, droits e t taxes.
32


(2) L'avis d 'émission p our r ecouvrement d oit être r édigé et n otifié au contribuable
lorsqu'une d éclaration é crite n'est pas accompagnée d e moyens de paiement o u suite à une
retour s ur v aleur non m archande o u du document d e procédure f inal d ans le c as d'un c ontrai.
Sous r éserve d e l 'approbation d u D irecteur g énéral des impôts, l 'avis de m ise e n r ecouvrement peut
être é tabli a vant l e dépôt du d ocument d e p rocédure d éfinitif, n otamment dans l e c adre d 'un c ontrôle
comptable général, lorsque l es impôts o nt été expressément acceptés au p rocès­verbal p ar l e
contribuable. D ans c e c as, un a vis p artiel de mise e n r ecouvrement fixe l e m ontant principal de
l'impôt a ccepté a insi que l es pénalités et intérêts de r etard normalement d us. À l 'issue de l a p rocédure
de contrôle, u n a vis c omplémentaire de m ise e n r ecouvrement est é tabli p our les i mpôts r estant d us.
Le r este restera i nchangé.
(3) Le c ontribuable p eut é galement recevoir e t ê tre i nformé de l'avis d'émission pour r ecouvrement.
par voie é lectronique. D ans c e c as, l 'avis d'émission pour c ollecte s era r éputé
avoir été a verti l orsque le s ystème g énère un accusé d e réception.
CHAPITRE 1 1
PROCÉDURE
DIVISION L a
PROCÉDURES J URIDIQUES SPÉCIALES
www.prc.cm
SOUS­SECTION V I
EXCLUSION D E PROCÉDURES S PÉCIFIQUES
Article L 79 : L e défaut d e paiement d es impôts, taxes e t d roits, après mise e n demeure, entraîne
l'interdiction temporaire d e soumissionner a ux m archés publics, d e manifester l'intention d'acquérir
une e ntreprise p ublique e n voie de privatisation, d 'effectuer d es o pérations d e bourse, d e
soumissionner a ux permis de tonnage o u de solliciter l a d élivrance d e lettres de voiture s écurisées,
et l 'interdiction définitive en cas d e récidive.
Le D irecteur G énéral des Impôts é tablit c haque trimestre la liste des c ontribuables i nterdits d e
soumissionner.
CHAPITRE I II
GARANTIES DE COLLECTE
DIVISION I II
PAIEMENT SOLIDAIRE
Article L 86 : L 'avis d e mise en recouvrement r égulièrement dressé e st opposable non seulement
au c ontribuable qui y e st m entionné, m ais é galement à ses représentants o u ayants droit.
. .. ... ... ... ... ... . .. ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . ­ ­ ­ . . . ... ... ... ... ...... ... .. . . . . ... . ..
N_C_E_O_E P RÉSIDENT __ .....• J BL1oi:Œ:::::J 7 ­­PR_E_S_I_O_E
33
ETR
Y Aff A IRS CARO Cf
IFIEE C O ft MOI
TDIII : ­..,


Lorsque l es d roits sur l es ressources n aturelles o u les a ctions, p arts e t fonds de commerce d 'une e ntreprise
de droit c amerounais s ont t ransférés à l'étranger, l 'entreprise de droit c amerounais et le cédant sont
solidairement tenus a u paiement d es sommes d ues au t itre d e c e transfert.
Le reste r estera inchangé.
CHAPITRE I V
CERTIFICAT D E C ONFORMITÉ FISCALE
Article M 9 4a : ( 1) T oute p ersonne physique o u m orale redevable d 'un i mpôt, d'un d roit o u d'une t axe, e n
règle d e déclaration e t d e p aiement de c es impôts, d roits e t taxes, peut, sur demande, s e voir d élivrer par
l'administration fiscale u n c ertificat de c onformité f iscale. C e c ertificat a tteste q ue l e contribuable est e n r ègle
avec s es obligations d éclaratives e t n 'est r edevable d 'aucun i mpôt à la date de d élivrance.
(2) N onobstant l es dispositions d u p aragraphe 1 ci­dessus, l e certificat d e c onformité f iscale
peut é galement ê tre d élivré à un c ontribuable q ui a une d ette fiscale, l orsque :
­ l e d élai p révu à l'article M 5 3 du M anuel des procédures f iscales p our
le p aiement d e la d ette f iscale n’est p as expiré ;
­ l e c ontribuable e st sous l e c oup d'une suspension o u d 'un m oratoire de p aiement dûment accordé par l '
autorités compétentes.
Dans c e c as, la d ette f iscale e t l a n ature de l 'acte s uspensif d oivent ê tre indiquées sur le certificat d e
conforwmité fiscale. ww.prc.cm
Le reste r estera i nchangé.
(3) L e certificat d e conformité f iscale e st délivré e n ligne à partir du site d e l'administration fiscale.
système informatique. L 'authenticité d e t out certificat de c onformité f iscale délivré
électroniquement d oit être v érifiée p ar s a p résence sur l a liste d es certificats de c onformité f iscale
publié é lectroniquement p ar l 'administration fiscale.
L'attestation d e c onformité f iscale e st v alable t rois ( 3) m ois à compter d e sa d ate de s ignature. Ce d élai
est r éduit à un ( 1) mois l orsque le c ontribuable a bénéficié d 'une suspension d e p aiement o u d'un
moratoire s ur s a d ette fiscale.
Article L 9 4b : ( 1) T oute p ersonne physique o u m orale, redevable d 'impôts, de d roits o u de t axes, qui sollicite
un titre, u ne l icence, une c ertification, une a ttestation, une a utorisation o u u n agrément q uelconque a uprès
d'un s ervice public ou parapublic de l 'État d ans l e cadre de l 'exercice d e ses a ctivités, d oit o bligatoirement
mentionner s on n uméro d 'identification u nique (NAS) s ur sa demande e t y joindre une a ttestation de
conformité fiscale e n cours d e validité. L e défaut d e p roduction de c e document entraîne l 'irrecevabilité de la
demande.
(2) L e certificat d e conformité f iscale s ert de c ertificat fiscal ou n on f iscal et de c ertificat f iscal.
bordereau d e situation. I l s era l e s eul document valable dans toutes l es p rocédures a dministratives p our
prouver la s ituation fiscale d 'un contribuable.
Article M 9 4c : ( 1) L es éléments suivants s ont s oumis à la présentation d 'un c ertificat d e conformité f iscale
valide :
∙
­ transferts d e f onds à l'étranger par d es p rofessionnels ers;
c­ . ­ . ∙..
34
SERVICE
nDa.­


­ délivrance d es c ertificats d'exonération et paiement d es impôts e t t axes ;
­ paiement d es f actures et subventions d e l'État, des c ollectivités t erritoriales e t des c ollectivités l ocales
autorités, établissements p ublics, entreprises semi­publiques o u p ubliques e t
sociétés privées, d ont la l iste s era é tablie par le m inistre en
responsable d es f inances;
­ opérations d ’exportation ;
­ les demandes d e v isa a uprès d es missions diplomatiques e t consulaires.
SOUS­PARTIE IV
SANCTIONS
CHAPITRE
SANCTIONS FISCALES
DIVISION L a
SANCTIONS S PÉCIALES
Article L 104 : (1) E st p unie d 'une a mende forfaitaire p ouvant aller j usqu'à 5 000 000 ( cinq m illions) de
FCFA, t oute personne qui fournit d es renseignements, q ui s e p révaut d u d roit d e c ommunication ou d e
notification d es t iers t itulaires, ou q ui refuse de f ournir l es renseignements o u d ocuments e xigés p ar
l'Admiwnistration f iscwale en a pplicawtion d es d ispo.sitiopns d es a rtircles 1 8c ( 4), 1 8b. (supcprimé), 7 9m, 9 3i ( 6), 2 45,
583, 5 83a ( 1), 5 83b ( 1), 598a, L 1 , M 6 , M 8d et M 48b d u L ivre d es procédures f iscales. D e même, est
punie d'une a mende d e 1 00 0 00 ( cent) F CFA par j our de r etard, au­delà des délais indiqués sur l a demande,
toute tentative de s e p révaloir d u d roit d e c ommunication ou d e n otification d es t iers titulaires.
(2) L 'amende v isée au ( 1) c i­dessus est p ortée à 50 0 00 0 00 F CFA (cinquante
millions) e n c as de n on­respect des obligations é noncées aux a rticles
18b, 1 8c e t M 6 a du p résent C ode.
♦
Article M 1 04b : S ans p réjudice d u r ecouvrement d es i mpôts é ludés, a ssorti d e s anctions, l e défaut d e
délivrance d 'une a ttestation d e r etenue à la s ource o u d e p aiement des i mpôts p ar le biais d u s ystème
informatique d e l 'administration f iscale est p uni d'une amende c orrespondant a u m ontant d e l 'opération
effectuée e n d ehors d u s ystème.
CHAPTER Il
SANCTIONS
DIVISION 1
PEINES P RINCIPALES
Article M 1 08 : L es p eines v isées à l'article M 107 ci­dessus s eront é galement infligées à quiconque :
­ fait o u a ssure l a réalisation d 'entrées, o u e ncourage l a réalisation d e
écritures i nexactes o u f ausses d ans les j ournaux e t les livres de b ilan
PRESSION
PRÉ 35
ET
VICE
RME


prévues par l 'Acte uniforme de l'OHADA ou d ans l es documents e n t enant l ieu, a insi q ue toute
personne c onvaincue d 'avoir é tabli ou e ncouragé l 'établissement
UP d e f aux bilans ;
­ p ar t outes s ortes d e manœuvres, e ntrave la m ise en œ uvre d u s ystème
pour l e s uivi é lectronique e t l a p roduction de f actures par l es entreprises ;
Le r este r estera inchangé.
SOUS­PARTIE V
LITIGES F ISCAUX
CHAPITRE I
COMPÉTENCE CONTESTÉE
DIVISION 1
SAISINE P RÉALABLE DEVANT L 'ADMINISTRATION F ISCALE
LOTISSEMENT I II
SURSIS D E PAIEMENT
Article M 1 21 ( nouveau) : ( 1) Le c ontribuable qui c onteste le b ien­fondé ou l e m ontant d 'un i mpôt q ui l ui
est a ppliqué p eut o btenir un sursis a dministratif de p aiement de l a p artie litigieuse dudit i mpôt, dans l es
conditions s uivantes :
un. .............................. .
www.prc.cm
b. ∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙
C . .............................. .
(2) .................. ................................................................................. ;
(3) Le s ursis d e p aiement p eut être é mis manuellement dans u n d élai de 1 5 ( quinze) jours à compter de l a d ate
de l a r éception de la d emande. E n l'absence d e r éponse d e l 'administration f iscale dans c e délai
équivaut à une a cceptation t acite du sursis d e paiement.
(4) L e s ursis d e paiement c esse d 'avoir e ffet 8 (huit) j ours a près la n otification
de l a d écision d e l'autorité s aisie o u, en c as de s ilence, a près expiration d u d élai
le d élai dont d ispose c e d ernier p our prendre u ne décision.
Le r este restera inchangé
DIVISION L a
TRANSACTIONS
Article M 1 25 : Le ministre chargé d es finances p eut, sur proposition d u
Le D irecteur Général d es I mpôts peut, dans l e c adre d'une t ransaction, a utoriser la m odération de t out
ou p artie d es i mpôts dans l es deux c as s uivants :
­ a vant l a c ollecte suite à une p rocédure d ’audit ;
­ p endant t oute la p rocédure contentieuse, y compris p our les impôts dont l es créances ont été
déclarées i rrecevables pour des r aisons f ormelles, o ù c es taxes p euvent ê tre r évisées
sur le f ond.
PRÉSIDENCE D
Le r este restera inchangé
PRESSION
36
COLÈRE
RVICE
Moi
et


CHAPITRE 11
JURIDICTION V OLONTAIRE
DIVISION L a
PÉTITIONS DES C ONTRIBUABLES
SUBDIVISION I l
DÉCISION DE L 'AUTORITÉ FISCALE
Article M 1 45 : ( 1) Les d écisions d e r emise ou d e r éduction sont n otifiées en l igne via le système
informatique d e l a D irection g énérale d es impôts.
(2) T outefois, l e m inistre des F inances e t le directeur général des impôts peuvent, dans la limite de
leurs s euils p ertinents tels q ue décrits c i­dessous, a ccorder u ne r emise ou u ne r éduction supérieure
aux t aux f ixés à l'article M 144 ( nouveau) c i­dessus, c omme suit :
... ... ...... ... ... . . . ... . . . ...... ... ...... ... ...... .. . . . . . . . . . . ... ......... . . . . . . . . ... ∙∙∙ ∙ ∙1
..... . . . . . . . ...... . . . ......... . .. ......... ... . .... . ... ... ... . ..... ...... ..... . ...... ... ... .. ,
CHAPITRE T ROIS
DISPOSITIONS R ELATIVES A UX AUTRES RESSOURCES
ARTICLE S EIZE : Mise e n p lace d'un p rogramme d e r égularisation v olontaire
www.prc.cm
1. L es contribuables qui, d e l eur propre i nitiative, r égularisent v olontairement l eur s ituation
fiscale a u t itre de l eurs revenus e t biens détenus h ors du C ameroun a u c ours d e l 'exercice
2024, sont e xonérés des pénalités c orrespondantes.
2. A l a f in de l 'exercice 2 024, a ucune r emise de p énalités n e s era accordée p our ces types d e
revenus p our l a période n on p rescrite.
ARTICLE D IX­SEPT : Institution d 'une redevance p our financer la transformation n umérique de
l'administration f iscale
1. I l e st i nstitué u ne r edevance destinée à f inancer la transformation n umérique de l 'impôt.
administration.
2. L a redevance p our le financement d e l a transformation n umérique d e l 'administration f iscale e st
perçue s ur t ous l es d ocuments générés à p artir d u s ystème informatique d e l 'administration
fiscale, n otamment :
­ l e c ertificat d'immatriculation ;
­ l 'attestation d e c onformité f iscale.
3. L e d roit p révu au ( 1) c i­dessus e st f ixé à 1 0 00 F CFA.
4. P roduit d e l a r edevance pour le financement de l a transformation n umérique d e l 'impôt
l'administration s era répartie c omme suit :
­ 4 0% a u b udget de l ’Etat ; ..
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)oe:'!Ai∙,;­ L IOUE
PRES\OENCE
DE P RESIO cPU8
ET
VICE 37
RME
OP'i


­ 6 0% pour l e f inancement d e l a t ransformation numérique d u Général
Direction d es I mpôts.
ARTICLE D IX­HUIT : Réajustement d es t aux d e taxe s ur l es p rélèvements d 'eau
Les dispositions d e l'ARTICLE O NZE d e la l oi de finances n ° 2004/026 du 30 d écembre 2 004 sont
modifiées e t c omplétées c omme suit :
« SECTION O NZE » (NOUVEAU) :
..•.•••.••...................................•......•..•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••..•.•...•...........
Les tarifs pour l e c aptage d es e aux de s urface o u s outerraines à des f ins industrielles o u
commerciales s ont les suivants :
­ 1 50 F CFA p ar mètre c ube pour l es 1 0 00 p remiers m ètres c ubes d’eau p rélevés ;
­ 7 5 FCFA p ar mètre c ube p our l es e aux utilisées au­delà de 1 000 m 3 ;
­ 2 5 FCFA p ar mètre c ube p our l e p rélèvement d 'eau à des f ins agricoles, d'élevage ou
à d es fins de pisciculture, p our u n e ffectif s upérieur à 5 000 ( cinq mille) équivalents­personnes par j our.
Le reste r estera inchangé
ARTICLE D IX­NEUF : É tablissement d 'une amnistie p our les t ransferts d e b iens immobiliers n on c ommerciaux
www.prc.cm
(1) U ne a mnistie e st é tablie pour l es transferts de biens i mmobiliers s oumis à l'enregistrement
entre l e 1 er j anvier 2024 e t l e 31 d écembre 2024, ainsi q ue p our les b iens i mmobiliers
transferts déclarés a vant le 1 er j anvier 2 024.
(2) L 'amnistie v isée a u (1) c i­dessus s 'applique a ux t ransferts d e b iens i mmobiliers p ar
mode d e succession, d ivision, mainlevée d 'indivision e t e ntre vifs
donations en ligne directe e t e ntre époux.
(3) L es transferts d e biens i mmobiliers non commerciaux v isés au p résent a rticle s ont
exemptés d e pénalités e t de t oute a utre augmentation d ’impôt.
(4) L 'amnistie e st a ccordée à la d emande du c ontribuable, q ui d oit être
déposé a uprès d u bureau des i mpôts l ocal du contribuable.
ARTICLE V INGT : É tablissement d 'une procédure spéciale d e r èglement d es c réances f iscales émises a vant le 3 1
décembre 2 022
(1) L 'administration f iscale est a utorisée à mettre e n œ uvre u ne p rocédure s péciale
pour l e r èglement d es c réances fiscales é mises avant le 3 1 décembre 2 022.
(2) L a procédure d e règlement spécial s'étend du 1er j anvier a u 31 d écembre.
2024 et c omme s uit :
a) Les opérations relatives aux i mpôts en p rocédure c ontentieuse :
­ P our l es litiges e n phase a dministrative : une r etenue de 50 % sur l e
montant i mpayé en l itige, l es cautions étant confisquées a u profit d u
Trésor. Dans c e cas, l e m ontant à payer peut ê tre s oumis à un échéancier
d’une d urée n ’excédant p as t rois mois;
,­(cid:0)(cid:0)­­­­
PRÉ SIOE N ­ ­(cid:0)(cid:0)­(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)
Relations p ubliques 38
­­­­∙­∙­­ AIRE .SERVICE R Mf;


­ Pour les l itiges en phase juridictionnelle : u ne déduction d e 6 5 % s ur l e
montant i mpayé e n l itige, l es cautions étant confisquées au p rofit du
Trésor. Dans ce cas, l e montant à p ayer peut être s oumis à u n é chéancier
n’excédant p as t rois m ois;
b) O pérations r elatives a ux a rriérés d ’impôts n on contestés :
­ Pour les e ntités publiques o u semi­publiques : u ne réduction d e 7 0 % , a vec possibilité d e
étaler les paiements s ur une p ériode maximale d e d ouze mois ;
­ P our les e ntités privées : u ne r éduction d e 5 0 % a vec possibilité d 'étalement
paiements j usqu'à douze mois.
(3) P our mettre e n œuvre le règlement s pécial relatif aux dettes f iscales contestées, l e
les cautions e xigées par l a loi pour l es recours contentieux d oivent a voir été v ersées.
(4) Arriérés d'impôts r églés par l a p rocédure d e c ompensation m utuelle des d ettes pour les d ettes réciproques
les dettes n e s eront pas c ouvertes par c ette procédure s péciale d e r èglement.
(5) A ucune demande de règlement s pécial n e s era acceptée a u­delà du 3 1 d écembre
2024.
(6) L orsque l e c ontribuable accepte l a proposition d e t ransaction,• il s 'engage volontairement :
• d e ne pas déposer d e réclamation u ltérieure ;
www.prc.cm
• d e retirer t oute r éclamation o u demande formulée.
ARTICLE VINGT ET UN : M odification d e certaines d ispositions r elatives a ux domaines d e l 'État, aux
recettes c adastrales e t f oncières
Les d ispositions d e l'article v ingt­trois d e la loi n ° 2022/020 d u 2 7 d écembre 2022 portant loi d e f inances
de la R épublique d u Cameroun pour l 'exercice 2 023 sont modifiées c omme suit :
« ARTICLE V INGT­TROIS ( nouveau) » : D ispositions r elatives a ux d omaines de l'État, a ux r ecettes cadastrales et
foncières.
Français L es t arifs d es r edevances r elatives a ux opérations domaniales, cadastrales et f oncières
énumérés à l'article t reize de la loi n ° 91/003 du 3 0 j uin 1991 portant l oi d e f inances d e l a R épublique
du Cameroun p our l 'exercice 1 991­1992 s ont m odifiés c omme s uit :
« SECTION TREIZE » ( nouvelle) :
L'article 1 4 de l a loi de finances n° 90/001 du 2 9 j uin 1990 est m odifié c omme suit :
Paragraphe 1 : Les t aux d es r edevances afférentes a ux opérations domaniales, cadastrales et f oncières
énumérées à l'article 19 de l 'ordonnance n ° 7 4 /1 d u 6 j uillet 197 4 f ixant les r ègles r égissant l e r égime
foncier s ont m odifiés c omme s uit :
1­ É TABLISSEMENT D'UN T ITRE F ONCIER
b) E n m orcelant l es propriétés existantes.
• 2 % d u prix d ’achat e n cas d ’achat c oûteux ;
PRÉSIDER
39
Relations publiques
ET
RVICE
­­­ u(cid:0)


• 2 % d e l a v aleur v énale indiquée d ans l 'acte n otarié dans l e cas d 'une v ente l ibre
acquisition.
• 3 % d u p rix d’achat l orsque le bien e st a cquis à un coût é levé ;
• 2 % d e l a v aleur m archande i ndiquée d ans l 'acte n otarié où le bien
est acquis gratuitement.
... ... ... ... . . . ... . . . ... ... . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... ... . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... ...
... ... . . . . . . . . . ... ... . . . . . . ... . .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . ... .. . . . . . . . ... ...
• • • • • 6 ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• • •• ••• •••••• ••• ••• ••• ••• • •• ••• ••• • •• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• • •• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• • •• ••• ••• • •• ••• ••• • •• • •
Il. DIVERSES INSCRIPTIONS AU R EGISTRE F ONCIER
a) H ypothèques e t p rivilèges;
• 1,25 % d e la v aleur v énale d es biens c oncernés ;
b) T ransferts t otaux ;
• Par v ente : 3 % du p rix d’achat.
V­ TRAVAUX TOPOGRAPHIQUES E T CADASTRAUX :
www.prc.cm
V­1­1­ Planimétrie
­ Démarcation :
un)
Immatriculation foncière, concession, m orcellement e t bornage simple.
Pour l'exécution de c es travaux, les frais s uivants s eront f acturés :
Pour les terrains s itués d ans le p érimètre u rbain
• 50 000 francs p our une surface inférieure o u é gale à 5 000 m 2
• 5 0 00 francs p ar hectare supplémentaire p our une superficie s upérieure à 5 000 m 2 •
VI. C ONCESSIONS ET BAUX S UR LES T ERRES NATIONALES, AINSI QUE L ES BAUX
SUR L A PROPRIÉTÉ PRIVÉE DE L'ÉTAT
Français L e d roit de b ase d es concessions et baux s ur l e domaine n ational prévus à l'article 15 du
décret n ° 76/166 d u 2 7 a vril 1 976 fixant l es modalités e t conditions de gestion du domaine national,
ainsi q ue d es baux o rdinaires o u e mphytéotiques sur l e domaine privé d e l'État p révus d ans l e domaine
prévu p ar le d écret n ° 7 6/167 d u 2 7 a vril 1 976 fixant les m odalités et conditions d e gestion d u domaine
privé de l 'État, e st fixé, s elon l a n ature e t l 'utilisation du terrain, comme suit p ar m ètre carré :
40


a) C oncessions e t baux t emporaires
Utilisation du s ol Terrain u rbain/m2 Terrain r ural/m2
'­­
Résidentiel 2 000 f rancs C FA 1 0 00 f rancs C FA
Commercial 3 0 00 francs C FA 1 500 f rancs C FA
Industriel 900 francs C FA 450 f rancs C FA
Sociale 300 FCFA 150 francs C FA
Culturel 150 f rancs C FA 80 francs C FA
Agricole 4FCFA 2FCFA
Religieux 10 francs C FA 10 FCFA
. ... ... ... ... . . . . ..... ......... ... ... ... ... ... . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... . . . ... ­­­ ... .. .
.......... .......... ....................................................
VIII­REDEVANCE POUR L 'OCCUPATION TEMPORAIRE DU D OMAINE P UBLIC
Les dispositions e n v igueur s ont c elles du décret n° 2 014/3209/PM du 2 9 s eptembre 2014 f ixant
les r edevances a nnuelles m inimales pour l 'occupation d es dépendances d u d omaine de l 'Etat.
Le r este restera inchangé.
ARTICLE VINGT­DEUX : Dispositions r elatives a ux r ecettes n on f iscales p rovenant d u s ecteur d es
affaires s ociales
www.prc.cm
1) Sont i nstitués d ans l e s ecteur d es a ffaires sociales :
a) les f rais r elatifs aux s ervices f ournis par d es établissements spécialisés e t
unités t echniques o pérationnelles;
b) les f rais r elatifs à l 'examen d es d emandes d'établissement
les r égimes privés de protection sociale s ont les suivants :
­ ∙
frais d 'examen d es d emandes d'accord de p rincipe p our l a
création d 'un é tablissement p rivé de protection sociale ;
­ m odalités d 'examen d es d emandes d'autorisation définitive de
création d 'un r égime p rivé de protection sociale.
2) Dispositions relatives aux t ees pour les services fournis p ar d es établissements spécialisés
établissements e t unités t echniques o pérationnelles
a) Les f rais visés au présent paragraphe d oivent être p ayés par t oute personne souhaitant
bénéficier d es s ervices f ournis e t qui r épond a ux critères d'admission
auxdites entités.
b) Les d roits visés au présent paragraphe s ont fixés p ar r èglement.
3) D ispositions r elatives aux f rais d'instruction d es demandes d 'établissement
des régimes p rivés d e protection s ociale
a) Toute p ersonne p hysique ou morale s ouhaitant c réer un o rganisme p rivé de p révoyance s ociale
Le r égime s era t enu d e payer les frais visés au p résent paragraphe.
b) Les h onoraires visés a u présent p aragraphe s ont fixés p ar l e r e 1 ;11
PRÉSIDENCE
p
ri;.;u­•" (cid:0)IRE 41
,SE(cid:0)VICt
RME
PY
FIED


ARTICLE V INGT­TROIS : Dispositions r elatives a ux recettes non f iscales p rovenant d u secteur
de l 'agriculture e t du d éveloppement r ural.
1) Sont institués, a u s ens d e l a loi n ° 2001/014 du
23 j uillet 2001 s ur les a ctivités l iées aux s emences :
­ l es f rais d'inscription d es e spèces et variétés v égétales sur l e registre o fficiel
catalogue;
­ les f rais de l ocation des fermes semencières ( entrepôt de s tockage, u nités d e c onditionnement, tracteur,
serre, h angar, t errain, e tc.);
­ f rais administratifs e t taxes p our la conduite d e la D ifférenciation ­
Homogénéité ­ S tabilité ( DHS) et V aleur Agronomique e t Technologique
(Un t éléviseur) t este.
2) Toute p ersonne p hysique o u morale e xerçant des activités l iées a ux semences a u sein d e
au s ens d e l a l oi du 2 3 j uillet 2 001 e st s oumise au paiement d es droits
et l es r edevances visées a u p aragraphe 1 c i­dessus.
3) Les f rais d'inscription d es e spèces e t variétés v égétales a u Registre officiel
Le c atalogue s era l e s uivant :
a) Inscription des e spèces e t variétés v égétales au Catalogue o fficiel p our u ne
période d e 5 ( cinq) a ns :∙
­ s emences d'espèces e t v ariétés v égétales p roduites l ocalement : 1 00 000 F CFA par
www.prc.cm
variété;
­ s emences d 'espèces e t variétés v égétales i mportées : 2 00 0 00 FCFA par variété.
b) R éinscription d es e spèces et variétés v égétales a u Catalogue officiel p our une
période d e 5 ( cinq) a ns :
­ s emences d ’espèces e t variétés végétales p roduites l ocalement : 5 0 000 FCFA ;
­ s emences d'espèces et variétés v égétales importées : 1 00 000 F CFA.
4) L es f rais d e location des fermes semencières (entrepôt d e stockage, unité de conditionnement, tracteur,
serre, h angar, t errain, e tc.) s ont f ixés par règlement.
5) Les f rais administratifs e t les h onoraires p our la r éalisation des études d e différenciation­
homogénéité­stabilité ( DHS) et de valeur agronomique et technologique ( TVA)
les t ests s eront d e 2 0 00 0 00 FCFA p ar variété.
ARTICLE V INGT­QUATRE : D ispositions r elatives aux r ecettes n on fiscales provenant d u s ecteur
commercial
1) L es frais suivants s ont i nstitués d ans le s ecteur d u c ommerce :
­ d emandes d'autorisation d 'exercer des activités c ommerciales en
Cameroun;
demandes de l icence annuelle p our l'importation d e motos e t de leurs
des pièces d e rechange;
PRÉSIDENCE
oo(cid:0)∙(cid:0)∙(cid:0)• (cid:0) (cid:0)(cid:0)===>
PRES!
(cid:0)
42
CE
MOI


­ les f rais relatifs à l 'examen de la d emande d e d éclaration de
existence;
­ les f rais d e d ossier p our l 'obtention d 'un c ertificat d e c arence p our tout p roduit soumis à accise
avant s on importation p ar u n opérateur é conomique ;
­ frais de d emande d 'agrément m étrologique.
2) Dispositions r elatives a ux droits d e demande d 'autorisation d'exercice d'activités commerciales au
Cameroun.
a) Seront s oumis a u p aiement des frais v isés a u (1) ci­dessus t ous les 3 (trois) ans :
­ personnes m orales e xerçant des a ctivités commerciales dont au moins 50 % des
le capital s ocial e st détenu p ar d es étrangers ;
­ les p ersonnes p hysiques exerçant des a ctivités commerciales au C ameroun q ui n e s ont pas de
nationalité c amerounaise.
b) Les honoraires v isés au ( 1) c i­dessus s ont les suivants :
­ 1 000 0 00 F CFA pour l es sociétés anonymes (SA) e t les sociétés par a ctions s implifiées
sociétés par a ctions;
­ 500 0 00 F CFA pour l es sociétés à r esponsabilité l imitée (SARL), dénomination s ociale
www.prc.cm
sociétés ( SNC) et s ociétés en c ommandite (SC$);
­ 200 000 F CFA pour l es p articuliers.
3) D ispositions r elatives aux droits a nnuels d e demande d e l icence p our l'importation d e m otocycles e t de
leurs p ièces détachées ;
a) Les personnes m orales e t physiques qui i mportent des motocycles e t leurs p ièces d étachées d oivent
être s oumis au p aiement d es frais visés a u (1) ci­dessus ;
b) Les honoraires visés au ( 1) c i­dessus s ont l es suivants :
­ 1 0 00 0 00 F CFA pour l es sociétés anonymes (SA) e t les sociétés par a ctions s implifiées ;
­ 500 0 00 F CFA pour l es s ociétés à r esponsabilité l imitée ;
­ 100 0 00 F CFA pour l es p articuliers.
4) D ispositions r elatives aux frais r elatifs à l 'examen de la d emande de déclaration d 'existence
a) Tout o pérateur économique désirant commercialiser du cacao ou du café au Cameroun e st soumis a u
paiement des d roits visés à l'alinéa ( 1) ci­dessus e t doit o btenir u ne a ttestation d e déclaration
d'existence d élivrée p ar le M inistère chargé du commerce.
b) L es frais d'examen d e l a d emande d u certificat susmentionné s ont fixés c omme suit pour une période
de 5 ( cinq) a ns :
PRÉSIDENT
PRÉ 43
IRE .
SERVICE
. ORME 111:ICft TDI ­DV


­ 1 000 0 00 F CFA p our l es s ociétés anonymes ( SA) et les s ociétés p ar a ctions simplifiées
sociétés p ar actions;
­ 5 00 0 00 F CFA pour l es s ociétés à responsabilité limitée ;
­ 2 00 0 00 F CFA pour l es p articuliers.
c) Toutefois, l es p roducteurs e t l es i ndustriels ne s ont pas tenus de p ayer l es c harges c i­dessus.
d) S ont e xonérés du p aiement d es r edevances visées au ( 1) ci­dessus : les o rganisations c onstituées
par les p roducteurs et l es u nités locales de t ransformation.
5) Dispositions r elatives aux frais d e d ossier pour l 'obtention d 'un c ertificat de c arence pour tout produit
soumis à accise a vant s on importation p ar un o pérateur é conomique.
a) L es opérateurs économiques qui d ésirent ê tre e xonérés d es droits d 'accises à l'importation d ans les
conditions p révues p ar les l égislations f iscale e t douanière sont soumis au p aiement d es redevances
visées a u ( 1) c i­dessus.
b) L e certificat v isé au ( 1) c i­dessus e st délivré p ar l e m inistre c hargé
d'échanges p onctuels o u o ccasionnels p our c haque t ransaction.
c) Les f rais v isés au p résent p aragraphe s ont fixés à 1 000 0 00 F CFA.
6) Dispositions r elatives aux frais p our l es d emandes d 'approbation métrologique délivrées p ar l e
Ministrwe c hargé du wc ommerce p owur u ne durée. de 3 p (trois) anrs c.cm
a) L es i mportateurs, f abricants, f ournisseurs et réparateurs d 'instruments d e m esure, a insi que l es
laboratoires effectuant des étalonnages e t des essais métrologiques, s ont soumis au p aiement d es
taxes v isées au ( 1) c i­dessus.
b) L es h onoraires visés au ( 1) c i­dessus s ont l es suivants :
­ i mportateurs, r éparateurs e t f abricants d 'instruments d e m esure : FCFA
1 000 0 00;
­ l aboratoires d'étalonnage e t d 'essais métrologiques : 1 000 0 00 F CFA.
c) Lorsque l a demande d'approbation m étrologique p orte s ur plusieurs a ctivités, l e m ontant l e p lus
élevé est d éduit s ans c umul.
7) Dispositions r elatives a ux infractions p révues p ar l a l oi n ° 2 015/018 du 2 1
Décembre 2 015 régissant l'activité commerciale a u C ameroun.
a) Les i nfractions a ux dispositions d e l a l oi n° 2015/018 du 2 1 d écembre 2 015 r égissant l 'activité
commerciale a u C ameroun sont p unies d 'une a mende é gale à cinq ( 5) fois la v aleur des
marchandises e n c ause, a vec un m inimum de t rente m ille (30 0 00) FCFA pour les p ersonnes
physiques e t d e c ent m ille (100 0 00) F CFA pour les personnes m orales.
b) L es infractions prévues p ar la loi v isée au p résent a linéa s ont punies d'une amende é gale à dix (10)
fois la valeur des biens en c ause, a vec un minimum de c ent mille (100 000) FCFA pour les
personnes p hysiques e t d e d eux c ent c inquante mille (250 000) FCFA pour les p ersonnes m orales.
,..
PRÉSIDENCE D E LA
∙ P RÉSIDENT Rf.JMffl(cid:0) 44
m,IRSC CE
IEE CO
­­­­ ET
­­∙ ∙­


ARTICLE V INGT­CINQ : D ispositions r elatives a ux recettes non fiscales p rovenant du s ecteur des
communications
1) L es r evenus p rovenant d u s ecteur des c ommunications t els q ue s tipulés dans l a loi n°
2015/007 d u 20 avril 2 015 régissant l 'activité a udiovisuelle a u C ameroun et l a loi
N° 2006/018 d u 2 9 d écembre 2006 p ortant r églementation de l a publicité au C ameroun,
notamment d e :
­ les f rais, charges e t r edevances pour l 'émission et l 'exploitation des supports a udiovisuels
licences;
­ les f rais et c harges pour l a d élivrance e t l 'utilisation de l 'autorisation d'exercer
certaines a ctivités audiovisuelles ;
­ les frais de délivrance et d 'utilisation d e l 'accréditation p our l a production e t
fourniture d e p rogrammes audiovisuels l imités dans le temps e t d ans l ’espace ;
­
∙ les formulaires de d emande d'accréditation d es j ournalistes é trangers s ouhaitant t ravailler e n
Cameroun à titre temporaire ;
­ amendes diverses ;
­ F rais d'instruction des d emandes d'autorisation et d e f onctionnement
autorisations d’exercer la p rofession de p ublicitaire ;
2) D ispositions r elatives a ux f rais, droits et r edevances p our l 'émission et l 'utilisation des
licewnces a udioviswuelles. w.prc.cm
a) L es personnes physiques o u m orales exerçant les activités s uivantes s ont soumises à
le p aiement d es f rais et r edevances pour l'octroi e t l 'utilisation des œ uvres a udiovisuelles
licences v isées a u ( 1) ci­dessus :
­ éditeurs;
prestataires d e s ervices;
­ agrégateurs ;
­ a grégateurs d e c ontenus audiovisuels ;
­ les distributeurs de s ervices audiovisuels ;
­ opérateurs d e s ystèmes d ’accès conditionnel ;
­ éditeurs de services de t élévision m obile persona! ;
­ les opérateurs d e t élévision par satellite ;
­ opérateurs d e t élévision p ar câble ;
­ les o pérateurs d e p lateformes d e diffusion d e c ontenus audiovisuels.
b) Les c oûts, f rais et r edevances pour l'émission et l 'exploitation des s upports a udiovisuels
les l icences s ont l es s uivantes :
1. F rais d'examen des d emandes ou d e renouvellement de l icences a udiovisuelles
licences:
PRÉSIDER
Relations publiques
45
NTAIRE
SERVICE X
RMI;
DV


­ d iffusion r adiophonique l ocale : 2 50 0 00 FCFA ;
­ r adiodiffusion nationale : 5 00 0 00 FCFA ;
­ r adiodiffusion é trangère : 1 0 00 0 00 FCFA ;
­ d iffusion o u é dition d e p rogrammes de t élévision n ationale : 5 00 000 F CFA ;
­ d iffusion o u é dition d e p rogrammes t élévisés é trangers : 5 00 0 00 FCFA
­ d istributeur n ational de p ackages d e c ontenus a udiovisuels, contenus a udiovisuels
agrégateur d e n ationalité camerounaise ( câble, terrestre o u s atellite)
distribution) : 500 000 F CFA ;
­ d istributeur d e p ackages d e c ontenus a udiovisuels n ationaux e t étrangers
agrégateur de c ontenu ( distribution p ar c âble, terrestre o u s atellite) : 5 00 F CFA
000.
2. F rais d 'obtention ou d e r enouvellement d'une l icence d 'exploitation d 'un s ervice audiovisuel
entreprise de c ommunication :
­ r adiodiffusion l ocale / 5 a ns : 5 0 00 000 F CFA ;
­ r adiodiffusion n ationale /5 a ns : 2 5 0 00 0 00 FCFA ;
­ r adiodiffusion é trangère /5 ans : 50 0 00 0 00 FCFA ;
www.prc.cm
­ d iffusion t élévisuelle ou m ontage d e p rogrammes n ationaux 1 V / 5 a ns : FCFA
100 0 00 0 00;
­ d istributeur n ational d e p ackages de c ontenus a udiovisuels, contenus a udiovisuels
agrégateur de n ationalité c amerounaise ( câble, terrestre o u s atellite)
distribution) / 5 a ns : 1 00 000 0 00 FCFA ;
­ d istributeur n ational de p ackages de c ontenus a udiovisuels, audiovisuel é tranger
agrégateur d e c ontenu ( cabie, distribution t errestre o u s atellite) / 5 a ns :
150 0 00 0 00 F CFA.
3. R edevance a udiovisuelle : 3 % d u c hiffre d'affaires a nnuel hors t axes.
3) Dispositions r elatives a u p aiement d es d roits e t redevances p our l 'octroi e t
exploitation d e l icences pour e xercer c ertaines activités a udiovisuelles.
a) Les p ersonnes p hysiques ou m orales qui e xercent les a ctivités s uivantes sont soumises
au paiement d es d roits et r edevances pour l 'octroi e t l'exploitation d es l icences
pour r éaliser c ertaines d es a ctivités a udiovisuelles v isées au ( 1) ci­dessus :
­ l a c ommercialisation d e p roduits ou d e s ervices fournis soit par d es é diteurs, s oit
producteurs;
­ l a mise en place de p lateformes d e s tockage de c ontenus a udiovisuels ;
­ l 'installation e t l e réglage d es é quipements d e p roduction a udiovisuelle ;
­ l e f onctionnement d es c entres d e r essources de p roduction a udiovisuelle ;
­ l a c ommercialisation d 'équipements de p roduction e t de t erminaux d e r éception ;
PRÉ 46
À GENE ,ra'
t"""LATIF E T RE .FFAIRS A1IR
­ (cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)ifmffiifNirsrourm1tt
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ CARD FRVlrS :


­ la f ourniture d e services à valeur ajoutée l iés à l a t élévision n umérique
environnement.
b) Les droits et r edevances p our l ’octroi e t l ’exploitation de l icences p our c ertains
les a ctivités audiovisuelles seront les s uivantes :
­ l es frais de demande d e licences relatives aux a ctivités audiovisuelles
entreprises d e communication : 5 00 000 F CFA ;
'
­ redevance pour l 'exploitation d e la licence relative a ux a ctivités de
entreprises d e communication a udiovisuelle : 3 % d u c hiffre d 'affaires a nnuel h ors
impôts.
4) Dispositions r elatives a u paiement d es droits « pour l 'octroi et l 'exploitation d es
accréditation p our l a production e t la d istribution de p rogrammes audiovisuels
limité d ans l e temps e t d ans l 'espace.
a) Les personnes physiques o u morales produisant et/ou é ditant des œ uvres audiovisuelles
les p rogrammes s eront soumis a u paiement d e f rais pour l'émission e t l 'utilisation des
l'accréditation p our l a p roduction et l a distribution d e p roduits audiovisuels
programmes limités dans l e temps et d ans l ’espace visés a u ( 1) ci­dessus.
b) Les frais de délivrance et d e fonctionnement d e l 'accréditation p our la p roduction
et l a f ourniture d e programmes a udiovisuels s eront les s uivantes :
­ frais d'instruction d es demandes d'agrément : 2 50 0 00 F CFA ;
www.prc.cm
­ l es f rais d'utilisation d e l'accréditation pour l a p roduction e t l a d istribution d e
audiovisual p rogrammes: F CFA 5 00 0 00.
5) Les frais de d ossier p our l'accréditation d es j ournalistes étrangers souhaitant travailler e n
Cameroun à t itre t emporaire, t el que v isé a u ( 1) ci­dessus, s era de 1 00 F CFA
000.
6) Dispositions r elatives a u paiement d es d roits d 'émission et d 'exploitation
licences d e p ublicité
a) Les p ersonnes physiques o u morales exerçant des p rofessions p ublicitaires s ont
sous r éserve d u paiement d e frais pour l 'émission et l 'exploitation de l a p ublicité
les l icences visées au (1) c i­dessus.
b) Les conditions d e délivrance et d 'exploitation d es licences d e p ublicité sont l es suivantes :
­ f rais d'instruction d es d emandes de licences d e p ublicité : 5 00 F CFA
000;
­ r edevance publicitaire : 2% du chiffre d 'affaires h ors t axes (hors T VA).
7) Les a mendes visées au (1) c i­dessus, applicables au s ecteur d es c ommunications, s ont
être c omme s uit :
a) de 2 50 0 00 à 2 5 00 000 FCFA e t u ne p énalité de 1 00 0 00 à
1 0 00 0 00 F CFA p ar numéro ou par jour d e p arution, pour t out propriétaire d'un m édia
ou u n o rgane de communication a udiovisuelle s ans é diteur p révu à l 'article
Les articles 8 e t 37 de la loi du 20 avril 2 015 v isée au ( 1 ), a insi q ue p our tout
l#
PPRRÉESSSIDIOENNSCE D E (cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)­­­(cid:0)­­(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0);;;;" 47
NERA
S TRE\3 ET
AIRS
CAROi~ E T COf!TIC
MOI
Je S:11:h'l'n••­


personne q ui p ublie u n m édia sans d éclaration ou q ui publie u n média é tranger
interdit ;
b) de 300 000 à 3 0 00 0 00 d e francs C FA e t d'une amende de 1 00 000 à 1 0 00 000 de
francs CFA p ar n uméro publié, p our celui q ui édite un organe de p resse i nterdit ;
c) d e 2 00 000 à 5 0 00 0 00 d e francs CFA p our toute p ersonne q ui acquiert l a propriété
ou prend d es p articipations d ans p lus de t rois organes de presse é crite et p lus d 'un
organe de communication a udiovisuelle e n violation des dispositions d e l a loi relative
à l a t ransparence financière d es o rganes de c ommunication s ociale, o u contrevient
aux d ispositions d e l a loi r elative à l a transparence f inancière d es organes d e
communication s ociale ;
d)de 100 000 à 1 0 00 0 00 F CFA et u ne p énalité d e 20 0 00 à
200 ooo FCFA par j our d e résidence hors du t erritoire n ational, p our tout r édacteur ne
résidant p as a u Cameroun ;
e) de 100 000 à 1 0 00 0 00 F CFA et u ne p énalité d e 1 00 000 à
500 000 FCFA p ar nombre de j ournaux p arus, pour t oute personne é ditrice d'un
organe de presse suspendu ;
f) de 100 000 à 1 0 00 0 00 F CFA e t d 'une amende é gale à l a valeur d es exemplaires
distribués, p our quiconque continue à d istribuer e t à vendre un organe de p resse s aisi
ou un organe d e presse étranger s aisi ;
www.prc.cm
g) de 1 00 000 à 2 000 0 00 F CFA pour t oute p ersonne q ui refuse de p ublier o u de d iffuser
un r ectificatif s ans justification ;
h) de 50 000 à 2 0 00 0 00 F CFA pour t oute personne q ui refuse de publier
ou diffuser une r éponse ;
i) de 100 000 à 1 000 0 00 F CFA par n uméro de j ournal p ublié, p our t out r édacteur en
chef q ui ne se c onforme p as a ux o bligations prévues p ar l a loi relative à la transparence
financière des o rganes de communication s ociale, ainsi q ue les a uteurs solidairement
responsables d es s anctions p écuniaires infligées aux tiers contre les personnes
désignées aux d eux a rticles précédents, ainsi q ue toute p ersonne q ui aura p osé d es
affiches électorales e n violation d es d ispositions d e la loi relative à la t ransparence
financière des o rganes d e communication sociale ;
j) de 3 0 000 000 à 1 00 0 00 0 00 F CFA p our t out opérateur a udiovisuel t itulaire d'une
licence q ui c ède ou transfère s a l icence à un t iers, o u prête s on nom ou sa raison
sociale, d e q uelque m anière q ue c e soit, à u ne personne s ollicitant u ne licence pour
fournir d es s ervices de c ommunication a udiovisuelle ;
k) d e 30 000 0 00 à 100 0 00 0 00 F CFA pour t out o pérateur audiovisuel q ui fournit des
services a udiovisuels s ans avoir s ouscrit a ux obligations t echniques de cryptage ;
1) de 5 0 000 0 00 à 1 50 0 00 0 00 F CFA pour t out opérateur audiovisuel a gréé qui modifie
la r épartition d es a ctions d e sa s ociété, et/ou modifie l'actionnariat e ntraînant l'entrée
d'un n ouvel associé ou a ctionnaire dans l e capital d e ladite s ociété, s ans l 'agrément
de l 'autorité compétente ;
PRÉSIDENCE D
PRÉS 48
CONCERNANT
VICE
MOI
S:DT1e1!Je!! ... ­­∙∙­


m) de 100 0 00 0 00 à 3 00 000 000 FCFA p our t oute personne p hysique o u morale d e
nationalité étrangère, q ui détient, directement ou indirectement, p lus d e 49 %
(quarante­neuf pour c ent) d u capital o u des droits de vote d'une s ociété a utorisée à
exercer l'une ou l 'autre a ctivité d e communication a udiovisuelle ;
n) de 100 0 00 0 00 à 300 000 000 FCFA pour t out opérateur a udiovisuel a gréé o u toute
personne p hysique ou morale q ui contrôle, seule ou avec d'autres a ctionnaires, l es
activités d'un a utre o pérateur a gréé ou autorisé ayant le même o bjet social ;
o) de 50 0 00 000 à 300 000 000 F CFA pour t out exploitant public ou privé d'un multiplex
ou d 'une diffusion d es 3 1 signaux d e communication a udiovisuelle q ui, s ans justification,
refuse l 'accès a u p lateau technique à tout titulaire d 'une l icence ou d'un agrément ;
p) de 5 0 0 00 000 à 200 000 000 FCFA p our t out exploitant p ublic ou privé de multiplex ou
de r adiodiffusion d e s ignaux d e communication a udiovisuelle q ui, par l 'intermédiaire
de ses p lateformes t echniques, é tablit o u exploite, ou fournit u n réseau , u n sous­
réseau o u un s ervice a udiovisuel à des personnes sans licence ni agrément ;
q)de 1 00 0 00 0 00 à 500 000 000 FCFA p our t oute personne qui transmet o u fait
transmettre u n p rogramme audiovisuel, q uel que s oit l e moyen t echnique u tilisé, s ans
licence ni a grément ;
r) de 5w0 0 00 000w à 300 000 w 000 FCFA p.ourp t out opérrateucr a udiov.isuecl q ui ne m se c onforme
pas à u ne décision d e s uspension ou de retrait de sa l icence ;
s) de 50 0 00 000 à 300 0 00 000 FCFA pour t out opérateur a udiovisuel q ui ne respecte
pas les c lauses d 'un c ahier des c harges ;
t) de 5 0 0 00 000 à 100 000 000 FCFA p our t out opérateur a udiovisuel q ui n e se c onforme
pas aux obligations d 'information et d e documentation p révues p ar l a législation e n
vigueur ;
u) de 200 0 00 0 00 à 300 0 00 000 FCFA p our t out dirigeant d e droit ou de fait d 'une
entreprise d e r adiodiffusion p ar satellite q ui fournit des services a udiovisuels au public
sans a voir o btenu une licence d'exploitation, a insi que p our t out dirigeant d e droit ou
de f ait d 'une e ntreprise de r adiodiffusion t errestre qui a f ourni d es services a udiovisuels
au public s ur une fréquence a utre q ue celle qui lui e st attribuée o u qui a exercé s on
activité e n violation des d ispositions r elatives à la p uissance o u à l 'emplacement d e
l'émetteur ;
v) de 2 5 0 00 000 à 75 000 0 00 FCFA p our t oute personne qui fabrique, i mporte o u détient,
en v ue de la v ente, d e la mise en v ente o u de l'installation, tout équipement, m atériel,
dispositif o u i nstrument d estiné, e n tout o u en partie, à l'interception frauduleuse d e
programmes diffusés, l orsque ces p rogrammes s ont destinés à un public déterminé q ui
y a a ccès m oyennant r émunération à l'exploitant du service, a insi q ue p our t oute
personne q ui commande, c onçoit, o rganise ou diffuse d es messages p ublicitaires
faisant l a p romotion, d irectement ou i ndirectement, d e tout équipement, m atériel,
dispositif o u i nstrument v isé a u p résent p oint.
PRÉSIDENCE D E ..• ­:::"'.'""."'!­­­
PRÉSIDENT
s
SERV
49
CE
ET


w)Tout o pérateur o u personne du s ecteur a udiovisuel q ui, e n v iolation d e l a r églementation en v igueur
au Cameroun, d iffuse ou f ait d iffuser u n programme a udiovisuel m anifestant o u t endant à
vulgariser d es p ratiques d éviantes, e st passible d 'une amende d e 5 0 0 00 0 00 à 300 0 00 000 d e
francs CFA.
ARTICLE V INGT­SIX : D ispositions r elatives aux recettes n on f iscales provenant d u s ecteur d e
l'enseignement s upérieur
1) Sont institués d ans l e s ecteur de l 'enseignement s upérieur :
­ l es frais d e dossier p our l 'équivalence des diplômes, grades e t d iplômes é trangers
certificats;
∙ ­ l es règles r elatives à la c réation, à l’ouverture, à l’agrément, à l’accréditation e t à l’extension d es
établissements d ’enseignement s upérieur p rivés ;
­ i nscriptions p our les candidats aux e xamens n ationaux (Brevet d e
Technicien S upérieur a nd Higher N ational Diploma);
­ f rais d 'inscription p our l es c andidats à la f ormation m édicale nationale
examens.
2) Dispositions r elatives a ux c onditions d e d emande d'équivalence des qualifications, g rades e t
certificats étrangers
www.prc.cm
a) Les titulaires d e certificats, q ualifications e t grades é trangers sont soumis au p aiement des droits
visés a u présent paragraphe ;
b) Les d éparts v isés au présent p aragraphe s eront d e 2 5 0 00 FCFA par q ualification,
note ou certificat.
3) Dispositions r elatives a ux c onditions d'établissement, d'ouverture, d'agrément, d'accréditation e t d e
renouvellement des c ursus des é tablissements d 'enseignement s upérieur privés.
a) Les p romoteurs d 'établissements d 'enseignement s upérieur privés s ont soumis à une rémunération
des t ees visés au présent p aragraphe ;
b) Les frais v isés a u présent p aragraphe s ont les s uivants :
Demande d 'autorisation d 'établir un PHEI 500 000 F CFA
500 0 00 F CFA
Demande d 'autorisation d 'ouverture d'un P HEI
1 0 00 000 F CFA
Demande d 'enregistrement d 'un P HEI
500 000 FCFA p our chaque
Demande d e prolongation d'un P HEI
nouvelle f ilière d'études
4) Dispositions r elatives aux f rais d'inscription d es candidats a ux examens nationaux (Brevet d e
Technicien S upérieur e t D iplôme National S upérieur)
a) Candidates for t he B revet de T echnicien Supérieur and H igher Natidnal
Les examens de diplôme s ont soumis au p aiement des droits v isés au p résent paragraphe ;
_
D _E _ L_∙­(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)­
,__P_R _ ES_ I _ D _E _ ENT
_C _ • P RESSION 50
SERVICE ,(cid:0),,r.cn
ET
. RVtCE
AR 1(cid:0)11:s: (cid:0)n uc


b) L es h onoraires v isés a u ( 1) ci­dessus s ont l es s uivants :
5) D ispositions r elatives aux f rais d 'inscription des c andidats à l 'examen national d e médecine
examens d e f ormation.
a) L es c andidats aux examens n ationaux d e m édecine, de pharmacie e t
la formation e n o dontostomatologie e st soumise a u paiement d es d roits m entionnés
à dans c e p aragraphe ;
b) L es h onoraires visés a u p résent p aragraphe sont fixés c omme s uit :
Catégories d e recettes à percevoir Montant à
Type de f rais
payer (FCFA) 3 5
T­shirts d 'application p our le Catégorie A 500 4 0
Brevet de T echnicien
Catégorie B 500 4 5
Supérieur a nd H igher Catégorie C 500 5 0
Examens d u diplôme Catégorie D 500 5 5
national
Catégorie E 500 2 0
Formulaires d e c andidature Test n ational d'aptitude a ux é tudes m édicales, 000
pour les e xamens d 'entrée e n m édecine, pharmaceutique e t dentaires
stomatologique
Examen n ational de spécialisation 50 0 00
5) D ispositions r elatives aux frais d 'inscription des c andidats à l 'examen national d e médecine
www.prc.cm
examens d e f ormation
a) L es c andidats a ux diplômes nationaux d e m édecine, de pharmacie e t d'odonto­stomatologie
Les e xamens d e formation sont s oumis a u p aiement d es f rais v isés au présent
paragraphe;
b) L es t ees visés au p résent p aragraphe s ont les s uivants :
Montant à p ayer
Examens
(FCFA)
Test n ational d 'aptitude aux f ormations m édicales, pharmaceutiques
20 0 00
et o donto­stomatologiques
Examen n ational d e s pécialisation 50000
ARTICLE V INGT­SEPT : Dispositions r elatives a ux recettes n on fiscales p rovenant d u s ecteur de
l'environnement
1) L es f rais s uivants s ont institués dans l e s ecteur d e l'environnement :
­ d emande e t r enouvellement a nnuels d 'attestation de conformité e nvironnementale ( ECA)
frais;
­ a mendes e nvironnementales.
2) D ispositions r elatives à l'attestation annuelle d e conformité e nvironnementale
(ECA) f rais de d emande e t d e r enouvellement.
∙∙­­­(cid:0)­,
­­P(cid:0)R(cid:0)E(cid:0)S:":"ID::':E(cid:0)N:;";C(cid:0)E:ionie(cid:0)LLJ∙∙­∙
PRÉSIDER
51
ET


a) Toute p ersonne physique o u m orale titulaire d 'une Attestation de C onformité E nvironnementale
(ECA) ou u n c ertificat d e conformité e nvironnementale ( ECC) d oit payer annuellement
formulaires d e d emande e t de r enouvellement d 'attestation d e c onformité e nvironnementale
(ECA).
b) Les f rais visés a u présent paragraphe sont l es s uivants :
Non. Catégories d 'évaluation Montant ( FCFA)
1 p rojet a yant mené u ne évaluation environnementale s tratégique
(EES) o u une évaluation environnementale e t
Évaluation d e l'impact social ( EIES) 500 0 00
Établissements/installations a yant mené u ne
Audit e nvironnemental e t s ocial ( AES)
2 P rojets ayant mené u ne évaluation sommaire d e l 'impact environnemental
300 0 00
et s ocial ( EIES)
3 P rojets ayant p réparé une étude d 'impact environnemental
50 0 00
Déclaration ( EIE)
3) Toute demande d e r enouvellement est s oumise a u p aiement des t axes visées à l 'article
(1) c i­dessus;
www.prc.cm
4) Disposition r elative aux amendes environnementales.
a) Toute p ersonne p hysique o u m orale qui c ause u n dommage à l 'environnement est
passible d 'une a mende e nvironnementale t elle que v isée au p résent paragraphe.
b) Les c oûts v isés a u p résent paragraphe sont d éterminés c onformément à
le b arème f igurant à l'annexe 1 du présent chapitre.
ARTICLE I V­HUIT : Dispositions r elatives aux r ecettes n on f iscales p rovenant d u s ecteur forestier et faunique.
Les d ispositions d e l'article 14 de la loi n ° 9 6/08 du 1 er j uillet 1 996 portant l oi d e f inances d e l a R épublique
du C ameroun p our l'exercice 1 996/1997 sont modifiées c omme suit :
« SECTION Q UATORZE » (NOUVEAU) :
« ARTICLE 1 5 » (NOUVEAU) :
.
CHASSE P HOTOGRAPHIQUE
. ................................................................................................................ .
2 ­ T AXE P OUR L A C HASSE D ANS UNE Z ONE D E C HASSE F ERMÉE E T L A C ONDUITE D E LA
EXPÉDITIONS D E CHASSE DANS U NE Z ONE FORESTIÈRE D E L A FORÊT N ATIONALE
DOMAINE
•
. ........................................ ­∙ ­ ­­(cid:0)iElsfbEÊ(cid:0)cE.OE.DAY. ∙∙ii ∙ .. (cid:0)­(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)7,
SE
Anw­nn COLÈRE 52
VICE
Moi
et


•
•
3­ D ROITS DE LOCATION D ANS LES ZONES C YNÉGÉTIQUES
•
. . . ... . . . ... ... ... . . . ... ... ......... ...... ...... . ........ ... ........ . ... ... ... ... ... ....... '
•
4­ TAXE S UR LA CHASSE AU G IBIER
Les taux d e la taxe s ur l e gibier de c hasse s ont précisés dans le barème figurant à l 'annexe 2A d u
présent c hapitre.
5 ­ F RAIS DE C APTURE
Les modalités d e c apture et d e r étention d es a nimaux s auvages s ont précisées dans le tableau figurant
à l 'annexe 2B d u p résent c hapitre.
Le reste r estera inchangé
ARTICLE V INGT­NEUF : Tarifs d e c ertains r evenus provenant d es services d e la faune e t d es z ones
protégées
Les taux d e revenus des s ervices de l a f aune et d es aires p rotégées, s elon leur nature, s ont les s uivants :
www.prc.cm
1) Frais de demande p our l'examen d e l 'inventaire d e la faune Z IC e t Z ICGC
plans : 1 00 000 F CFA ;
2) Frais de dossier p our l 'examen des r apports d'inventaire d e la faune Z IC e t Z ICGC :
100 0 00 F CFA ;
3) Frais d e demande d e d ocuments de t ransport s écurisé d'animaux s auvages : 10 000 F CFA par unité ;
4) F rais de visite du s anctuaire d es g orilles p ar heure
­ N ationaux 1 5 0 00 F CFA
­ R ésidents ( résidents é trangers) : 5 0 0 00 FCFA
­ Touristes ( étrangers n on résidents) : 1 00 0 00 F CFA
5) F rais d e visite d es clairières d'éléphants, d e g irafes, de perroquets, d e pigeons, d e touracos e t
autres espèces e t s ites emblématiques p ar h eure :
­ Nationaux : 5 000 F CFA
­ Résidents ( résidents étrangers) : 2 0 0 00 F CFA
­ T ouristes (étrangers non r ésidents) : 30 0 00 FCFA.
ARTICLE T RENTE : D ispositions r elatives a ux recettes non f iscales p rovenant d u secteur du logement
et de l'urbanisme.
PRÉSIDENCE D E L A RÉPUBLIQUE
PRÉSIDENCE
SE
FROMAGES 53
IC£
MOI
PY


(1) Des frais a nnuels s ont i nstitués p our l 'obtention o u l e r enouvellement d e l a l icence
opérer e n tant q ue promoteur immobilier, a gent immobilier ou c opropriété
directeur.
(2) Les f rais v isés a u (1) c i­dessus s ont p ayables p ar toute personne physique o u m orale
personne souhaitant exercer e n tant q ue promoteur immobilier, agent immobilier ou
gestionnaire d'immeuble e n copropriété.
(3) Les f rais d e dossier visés a u (1) c i­dessus s ont l es suivants :
­ 1 500 0 00 F CFA p our u ne licence d e promoteur i mmobilier ;
­ 1 0 00 0 00 F CFA p our l a c arte p rofessionnelle d ’agent i mmobilier ;
­ 2 50 0 00 FCFA p our l a c arte d e syndic de c opropriété.
(4) Les d élais de renouvellement v isés a u paragraphe 1 c i­dessus s ont f ixés comme suit :
­ 1 0 00 0 00 F CFA p our l a l icence de promoteur i mmobilier ;
­ 5 00 0 00 F CFA p our l a c arte p rofessionnelle d ’agent i mmobilier ;
­ 2 00 0 00 FCFA p our l a c arte d e groupement de c opropriété.
ARTICLE T RENTE E T U N : D ispositions r elatives a ux r ecettes n on f iscales d u secteur de la J eunesse et
de l 'Education C ivique.
(1) Les r evenus d u secteur J eunesse et Éducation c ivique s e c omposent principalement de :
www.prc.cm
inscription e t départs p our l a p romotion jeunesse p olyvalente
Centres (CMPJ);
frais d 'inscription e t de cours pour l a P romotion Jeunesse P olyvalente
Centres ( CMPJ);
frais d e c ours a u Centre national de l a j eunesse e t d es sports ( CENAJES) à
Kribi, t oute personne a dmise e n formation au C ENAJES de K ribi ;
le coût de délivrance e t de renouvellement de l a c arte biométrique j eune ;
frais d e location p our l a l ogistique d 'animation d u M inistère de l a J eunesse e t d e l 'Education
Civique.
x) Dispositions r elatives a ux frais d 'inscription et de c ours d ans l es écoles polyvalentes pour j eunes
Centres de promotion ( MYPC).
a) Tout j eune s ouhaitant s uivre une formation dans u ne Promotion d e J eunesse P olyvalente
Le C entre (MYPC) e st tenu d e payer l es f rais d 'inscription et d e c ours.
b) Les i nscriptions e t les p arcours p our l es n iveaux de r éférence, régional, d ivisionnaire et
Les Centres p olyvalents d e p romotion d e la j eunesse s ubdivisionnaires, a insi que l es
Les p rocédures d e recouvrement s ont d éfinies c omme s uit :
Frais d 'inscription :
N° ∙­ . • ∙ ∙Types ∙de structures . ' Montant '(en _Cf AF) .. .. ; •'
.•'
1 Référence MYPC 25000
2 MYPC régional 10 000
­­..
­­P­RE_S_l(cid:0)O(cid:0)E­­N"'!"C'::"E(cid:0)(cid:0)­=­∙∙­­....... 54
Relations p ubliques


3 MYPC divisionnaire 7 5 00
4 MYPC subdivisionnaire 5000
Frais d e cours :
Non. Types de s tructures Montant ( en FCFA)
Référence MYPC 100 0 00
1 2 MYPC régional 75000
3 ∙ M YPC divisionnaire 50 0 00
­
4 Subdivision M YPC l 25 0 00
y) D ispositions r elatives a ux frais d e s colarité au Centre national de l a jeunesse e t d es s ports
à K ribi, p our t outes l es personnes a dmises en formation au C ENAJES d e K ribi.
a) Toute p ersonne a dmise en formation au C ENAJES de K ribi devra payer l e cours
tees a u Centre N ational d e la J eunesse e t des Sports d e K ribi.
b) Les horaires d'inscription, d e cours e t d'hébergement aux C ENAJES Kribi sont f ixés comme suit :
suit:
­ E lève f onctionnaire : 7 5 0 00 FCFA par a n ;
www.prc.cm
­ C andidat indépendant : 2 00 000 F CFA p ar an ;
­ L ogement : 1 00 0 00 F CFA par a n.
z) D ispositions r elatives a ux frais d e délivrance e t de r enouvellement du c ertificat b iométrique p our les jeunes
Carte.
a) Tout j eune c amerounais s ouhaitant o btenir une C arte B iométrique Jeune doit s'acquitter
les f rais de délivrance e t de renouvellement de l a Carte B iométrique J eune.
b) L es frais de délivrance et de renouvellement de l a carte biométrique j eune s ont f ixés c omme suit :
­ é mission : 10 000 F CFA.
­ R enouvellement : 1 0 0 00 F CFA.
aa) Les frais d e location de la l ogistique d 'animation du M inistère d e l a Jeunesse e t d e l 'Education Civique
sont f ixés selon l e b arème f igurant à l 'Annexe 3 d u p résent chapitre.
ARTICLE T RENTE­DEUX : Dispositions r elatives a ux recettes n on fiscales du s ecteur de l a s anté
publique.
1) Les revenus d u secteur d e la s anté p ublique sont des r evenus d e s ervices q ui sont normalement
inclus dans l e budget d e l'État.
2) L es revenus d u secteur de la s anté p ublique c omprennent :
frais d’approbation pour l es c ompléments a limentaires;
les f rais d'ouverture, d'exploitation e t de r enouvellement ainsi q ue les amendes p our suspension
ou le retrait d e l’agrément d ’une entreprise p rivée d ’hygiène et/ou d ’assainissement ;
PRÉS!
55
IAT'G
R L ÉGISLATIF
∙ MENTAIRE
_ _ RUNET A FlF(cid:0)AIREU TU:TeORIENNE !DfXSERVICf



=== FR_CM_Code_Penal_CamerounEN.pdf ===

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Journal officiel d e l a R épublique du C ameroun
CODE P ÉNAL
n° 6 7/LF/1
12 j uin 1967
LIVRE UN
DROIT P ÉNAL
PREMIER TITRE
SUR L'APPLICATION D U DROIT P ÉNAL
CHAPITRE UN
DISPOSITIONS P RÉLIMINAIRES
Article 1 — Aucune e xemption.
Le d roit p énal s ’applique à t ous.
Article 2 — Application générale e t particulière.
(1) L es r ègles du d roit i nternational et les traités d ûment p romulgués e t p ubliés s'appliquent au p résent C ode et à toute
disposition pénale.
(2) ( Loi n ° 6 7­LF­1 du 1 2 j uin 1 967) : Le p résent livre prévaut s ur toute a utre disposition pénale, à l'exception d es dispositions
spéciales v isant n otamment à interdire l es p eines avec s ursis et à interdire ou l imiter l es circonstances atténuantes, édictées a vant
même l 'entrée en vigueur du p résent livre, par u ne l oi o u p ar un t exte réglementaire à effet l égislatif. L e p résent a linéa est rétroactif
au 1er o ctobre 1966 inclus.
(3) L orsque la même matière fait l 'objet à la f ois d 'une d isposition générale non comprise d ans l e p résent l ivre e t d'une d isposition
particulière, cette d ernière s eule est applicable, sauf d isposition contraire.
CHAPITRE II
SUR L'APPLICATION D U DROIT P ÉNAL D ANS L E T EMPS.
Article 3 — Non­rétroactivité.
Les a ctes commis a vant s on entrée e n v igueur ou c eux qui n 'ont p as été jugés avant son abrogation e xpresse o u t acite n e s ont p as soumis
à l a loi pénale.
Article 4 — Loi moins stricte.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) T oute disposition pénale nouvelle et moins sévère s'applique aux i nfractions n on définitivement j ugées a u jour de s on entrée en
vigueur.
(2) S i l a n ouvelle disposition est plus stricte, les infractions c ommises a vant son e ntrée en vigueur continuent d'être j ugées c onformément à
l'ancienne l oi.
Article 5 — N ouvelle mesure d e sécurité.
Toute l oi é dictant une m esure de sûreté est applicable aux f aits n on définitivement j ugés au jour de s on entrée en vigueur.
Article 6 — S uppression d e l’infraction, de la peine o u de la mesure.
Cesse i mmédiatement de recevoir l ’exécution de toute peine ou mesure de sûreté :
a) P rononcée s ur la b ase d ’un acte qui ne constitue plus une infraction ;
(b) A boli a près c ondamnation.
CHAPITRE I II
SUR L 'APPLICATION D U D ROIT PÉNAL DANS L 'ESPACE.
Article 7 — Infraction c ommise s ur le territoire.
(1) L a l oi p énale de la République s'applique à t out acte commis sur s on t erritoire.
(2) L e t erritoire de la République comprend les eaux territoriales et l 'espace a érien au­dessus d e c e territoire e t d e ses e aux, a insi q ue les navires
et l es aéronefs immatriculés d ans l a République.
Toutefois, aucun m embre d e l'équipage d'un navire ou d 'un aéronef étranger, auteur d'une infraction commise à b ord au préjudice d'un
autre membre de l 'équipage, même dans l es eaux t erritoriales ou l'espace a érien, n e p eut être p oursuivi par l es tribunaux de l a
République, à m oins que l e concours de l 'autorité locale n'ait été r equis ou que l'ordre public n'ait é té c ompromis.
Article 8 — I nfraction commise partiellement o u totalement à l’étranger.
La l oi p énale de l a R épublique s'applique :
a) Toute infraction dont l’un des é léments c onstitutifs a é té commis sur s on territoire ;
b) L es i nfractions contre la sûreté de l 'État, la contrefaçon du s ceau d e l 'État o u d es monnaies nationales e n c irculation, c ommises m ême à l 'étranger.
Toutefois, aucun é tranger ne peut ê tre jugé par l es tribunaux d e la R épublique e n v ertu de l'alinéa b , à m oins qu'il n 'ait é té a rrêté sur l e t erritoire d e
la R épublique ou q u'il n 'ait é té e xtradé.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 9 — C omplicité, c omplot, tentative.
Sont soumis au droit pénal de la R épublique :
a) L es a ctes c onstitutifs d e complicité, d e c omplot e t d e tentative commis s ur l e territoire de la R épublique
en v ue de commettre une infraction à l 'étranger s i cette infraction est é galement punie p ar la loi
étrangère ;
b) Les m êmes a ctes c ommis à l 'étranger e n vue de commettre une infraction sur l e territoire de la
République.
Article 1 0 — I nfraction commise à l ’étranger par u n c itoyen ou un résident.
(1) L a l oi p énale d e la R épublique s'applique aux a ctes commis à l'étranger p ar un citoyen ou un résident, à condition
qu'ils soient punis par l a l oi du lieu où ils o nt été commis e t q u'ils soient qualifiés d e crimes o u de délits par les lois d e
la R épublique.
Toutefois, la p eine e ncourue ne peut être s upérieure à celle prévue par la loi é trangère.
(2) A ucun c itoyen ou résident c oupable d 'une i nfraction c ommise c ontre u n particulier n e peut toutefois être
jugé p ar les t ribunaux d e la R épublique en vertu d u présent a rticle, s i ce n'est s ur l a p oursuite du ministère p ublic s aisi
d'une p lainte o u d 'une d énonciation officielle a dressée a u gouvernement d e la République p ar le g ouvernement d u
pays où l 'acte a é té commis.
Article 1 1 — I nfractions i nternationales.
La l oi p énale d e la R épublique s'applique à l a piraterie, à la traite d es êtres h umains, à la t raite d es esclaves e t a u
trafic d e d rogue, m ême s 'ils s ont commis h ors d u territoire d e la République.
Toutefois, a ucun étranger n e peut ê tre jugé s ur le t erritoire de la République pour les faits v isés a u présent a rticle,
commis à l 'étranger, s 'il n 'a été arrêté sur le t erritoire d e la République e t n 'a p as été e xtradé e t à
condition q ue l'action p ublique s oit engagée p ar l e m inistère p ublic.
Article 1 2 — C ompétence générale des t ribunaux d e la R épublique.
Sous réserve d es e xceptions prévues a u présent chapitre, les tribunaux de la R épublique sont c ompétents pour connaître
de t outes l es i nfractions a uxquelles s 'applique s a l oi pénale.
CHAPITRE I V
DU DROIT É TRANGER E T D ES CONDAMNATIONS P ÉNALES.
Article 1 3 — E xclusion du droit é tranger.
Sous réserve d es a rticles 9 e t 10 et d u présent c hapitre, la loi p énale é trangère n 'a a ucun effet devant l es
tribunaux d e l a République.
Article 1 4 — S entences étrangères.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Les condamnations pénales p rononcées contre q uiconque p ar des t ribunaux é trangers n 'ont d'effet s ur le territoire de
la R épublique q ue si :
(a) L'acte est qualifié de c rime o u d 'infraction de common l aw par le d roit pénal d e l'État
République;
b) La régularité d e l a c ondamnation, s on c aractère définitif e t sa c onformité à l'ordre public d e la R épublique sont
constatés p ar l a j uridiction saisie d 'une poursuite c ontre la même personne ou par la cour d 'appel du domicile du
condamné saisie p ar l e m inistère p ublic.
Article 1 5 — Effets d es s entences é trangères.
Lesdites peines pénales :
a) Sont p rises e n c onsidération pour la r écidive e t la relégation, p our l’octroi ou la révocation d u sursis, p our la
révocation de l a libération conditionnelle, p our l a r éadaptation e t l ’amnistie ;
b) Empêcher t oute p oursuite ultérieure p our les m êmes f aits sur le territoire de la R épublique, à condition q u'en cas de
condamnation l a peine ait été purgée ou p rescrite o u qu'une g râce a it été accordée.
Article 1 6 — Exécution des j ugements é trangers.
(1) Lorsque les p eines visées e t constatées dans les c onditions prévues à l'article 1 4 ont été prononcées c ontre des c itoyens ou
des résidents e t n'ont p as é té e xécutées d ans un a utre p ays, e lles s ont exécutoires sur l e t erritoire de la R épublique, à moins
que l e condamné n'ait bénéficié d 'une libération conditionnelle, d 'une grâce o u d'une amnistie, ou que sa p eine n'ait été
prescrite.
(2) Il appartient à la j uridiction saisie d ans les c onditions prévues à l'article 1 4 d'ordonner l 'exécution d e cette p eine et de
prononcer, l e cas échéant, les m esures de s ûreté q ue l a loi d e la République attache a uxdites i nfractions.
TITRE I I
SANCTIONS ET M ESURES D E SÉCURITÉ.
CHAPITRE I
DISPOSITIONS P RÉLIMINAIRES.
Article 1 7 — Légalité des p eines et d es d élits.
Les peines et mesures s ont f ixées par l a l oi et ne s ont imposées q ue pour les i nfractions prévues par la loi.
Article 1 8 — Peines p rincipales.
Les principales sanctions sont :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
­ La peine d e m ort ;
­ Emprisonnement
­ L'amende.
Article 1 9 — Peines a ccessoires.
Les peines a ccessoires s ont :
­ L es confiscations ;
­ Publication d u j ugement ;
­ La fermeture de l ’établissement ;
­ Confiscation.
Article 2 0 — Mesures de s écurité.
Les mesures de sécurité s ont :
­ L’interdiction d’exercer l a profession ;
­ Relégation;
­ Mesures d e s uivi e t d’assistance p ost­pénales ;
­ Internement en m aison d e r etraite ;
­ Confiscation.
Article 2 1 — Qualification des i nfractions.
(1) L es infractions s ont classées e n c rimes, d élits et contraventions s elon les p rincipales p eines qui les punissent :
a) Sont considérées comme c rimes l es i nfractions punies de l a p eine d e m ort ou d ’une p eine p rivative d e l iberté de
plus de dix a ns ;
b) Sont c onsidérées comme délits l es i nfractions punies d'une p eine p rivative d e l iberté ou d 'une a mende lorsque l a p eine
privative de l iberté e ncourue e st supérieure à dix jours e t n 'excède p as dix a ns o u l orsque l e m aximum d e l 'amende
est s upérieur à 2 5 0 00 francs.
c) Sont considérées c omme contraventions les i nfractions p unies d 'un e mprisonnement d e d ix jours a u p lus ou d 'une amende d e 2 5
000 f rancs au plus.
(2) L a nature d ’une i nfraction n ’est pas modifiée :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
a) l orsque, p ar suite de l’admission d ’une e xcuse o u de circonstances a tténuantes, l a p eine imposée est c elle
prévue p our une a utre catégorie d’infractions;
b) D ans l es c as d’aggravation prévus a ux a rticles 88 et 8 9 du présent Code.
CHAPITRE I I
PRINCIPALES SANCTIONS.
Section I
LA PEINE D E M ORT.
Article 22 — Conditions p réalables à l ’exécution.
(1) Toute condamnation à m ort est soumise au P résident d e la R épublique pour l'exercice d e son droit d e grâce.
(2) Tant q ue le Président d e l a République n'a pas p rononcé la g râce d u condamné, a ucune p eine de mort ne peut
être e xécutée.
(3) Une f emme enceinte n ’est pas p assible de l a peine de mort avant d’avoir accouché.
(4) Aucune r eprésentation n e p eut a voir lieu l es d imanches e t j ours fériés.
Article 23 — Exécution.
(1) Le condamné à m ort est exécuté par b alle ou p ar p endaison, selon ce qui e st d écidé p ar le j ugement de condamnation.
L'exécution est publique, s auf décision c ontraire du j uge rejetant l a d emande d e grâce.
(2) Les c orps d es t orturés sont remis à l eurs f amilles, s i elles le d emandent, à condition q u'elles les fassent e nterrer s ans
aucune cérémonie.
(3) Seul le procès­verbal d 'exécution e t, le cas échéant, u n communiqué d e presse officiel p euvent être p ubliés dans l a p resse.
(4) Un décret p récise les c onditions d 'application d u présent a rticle.
Section I I
EMPRISONNEMENT.
Article 24 — Emprisonnement.
L'emprisonnement e st une p eine p rivative d e liberté d urant l aquelle l e c ondamné e st t enu d e travailler, à moins q ue le t ribunal
n'en décide autrement et n e f ournisse des m otifs.
Article 25 (nouveau. — L . n ° 7 8­11 du 2 9 d écembre 1 978).Salaire.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Le p roduit du t ravail du détenu est réparti comme s uit :
­ 2/3 a u Trésor ;
­ 1 /3 p our constituer l e pécule.
(2) Les modalités d'application d u présent article, notamment les c onditions de g estion de l 'épargne, s ont f ixées p ar décret.
Section III
LA DÉTENTION.
Article 2 6 — Abrogé par l a loi n ° 9 1/007 d u 3 0 j uillet 1991 modifiant l 'article 2 de la loi n ° 90/061 du 19 décembre 1990
[
Détention.
La d étention e st u ne peine p rivative de liberté imposée p our un crime ou un délit politique, d urant laquelle l es c ondamnés n e
sont p as tenus de t ravailler et purgent l eur peine d ans des établissements spéciaux. D ans le c as c ontraire, ils sont s éparés
des p ersonnes c ondamnées p ar la loi.
commun.
]
Section IV
DISPOSITIONS C OMMUNES À L A PRIVATION D E P EINE.
Article 27 — Début d e la phrase.
(1) S i l e condamné n'est p as e n d étention préventive o u si un m andat d 'arrêt ou d e d épôt n 'est p as décerné
contre lui à l'audience dans l es c onditions p révues p ar l e code d e p rocédure p énale, la peine p rivative d e l iberté
ne peut être e xécutée q ue l orsque l a condamnation est d evenue d éfinitive.
(2) Si une f emme c ondamnée à u ne peine privative d e liberté e st enceinte o u v ient d ’accoucher, elle ne p urge s a
peine que six s emaines après l ’accouchement.
(3) La f emme e nceinte placée e n détention préventive continue d e b énéficier du r égime d e d étention préventive jusqu'à
l'expiration du d élai visé à l 'alinéa précédent.
(4) Les époux c ondamnés p our d es infractions différentes à une p eine d 'emprisonnement inférieure à un a n e t
non d étenus au j our du jugement p euvent, à leur d emande, ne p as p urger leur peine s imultanément si, justifiant d 'un d omicile
commun, i ls ont s ous l eur g arde un enfant â gé de moins d e d ix­huit ans.
Article 28 — Calcul d e la peine.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) La p eine privative de liberté e xprimée e n jours e st calculée par tranche d e v ingt­quatre heures.
(2) La p eine d'un mois est d e trente jours.
(3) La p eine exprimée e n mois e t en années e st c alculée de d ate à date.
(4) Sous r éserve d es dispositions d e l'article 53, l e point d e d épart de l a peine est f ixé :
a) Le j our où la personne condamnée e st emprisonnée en e xécution d e s a p eine ;
b) E n c as de c onfusion d e peines au j our d e la première incarcération e n exécution de l'une d es p eines combinées.
(5) E n c as d'évasion, l a période pendant l aquelle l e c ondamné était en cavale e st exclue du calcul d e la
durée d e la peine.
Article 29 — S éparation d es mineurs.
Les m ineurs de m oins de dix­huit a ns purgent l eur p eine p rivative d e l iberté dans d es é tablissements s péciaux.
Dans le c as contraire, ils sont s éparés des d étenus adultes.
CHAPITRE I II
PEINES ACCESSOIRES.
Section I
DES DÉFAUTS.
Article 30 — D éfinition.
Les c onfiscations c onsistent en :
1° D ans la révocation e t l'exclusion d e toutes f onctions, e mplois o u c harges publiques ;
2° N e p eut être j uré, a ssesseur, expert, j uré­expert ;
3° Dans l'interdiction d'être t uteur, c urateur, subrogé t uteur o u c onseil d e j ustice, sauf p our s es propres enfants, o u m embre
d'un conseil d e famille ;
4° Dans l’interdiction d e porter u ne quelconque décoration ;
5° D ans l’interdiction de servir dans les f orces armées ;
6° A l 'interdiction de diriger une école o u même d'enseigner d ans u n é tablissement s colaire e t, d'une manière générale,
d'occuper des fonctions relatives à l 'éducation ou à la garde des e nfants.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 31 — C hamp d’application.
(1) La peine de réclusion à p erpétuité emporte l es d échéances prévues à l 'article précédent.
(2) Toute autre condamnation pour un crime entraîne l es m êmes d échéances p endant la d urée de la p eine e t pendant les dix ans qui s uivent
son expiration o u la libération c onditionnelle si c ette dernière n'a p as été r évoquée.
(3) Le tribunal p eut, dans tous les cas prévus à l 'alinéa précédent, p ar décision motivée, dispenser le c ondamné d e tout ou partie d e ces d élais e t
en réduire l a durée à d eux ans.
(4) En cas de condamnation p our infraction et l orsque la loi les y autorise, les tribunaux p euvent, par décision motivée, prononcer p our
une d urée pouvant a ller jusqu'à cinq a ns, t out ou p artie d es déchéances p révues à l 'article précédent.
Article 32 — D échéances e t c ontumace.
En cas de condamnation par défaut, les d échéances s ont encourues à c ompter d u jour o ù les mesures de publicité prévues
au Code d e procédure pénale sont accomplies.
Section I I
AUTRES SANCTIONS ACCESSOIRES
Article 33 — ( L. 93­013 du 2 2 décembre 1993) Publication d u jugement.
(1) Dans l es c as où le Tribunal o u l a Cour p eut ordonner la publication de sa d écision, c elle­ci e st affichée d ans les conditions f ixées par décret
pendant u ne d urée maximum d e deux mois e n cas de c ondamnation p our c rime o u délit et pendant une d urée m aximum de quinze j ours
en cas de contravention.
(2) Dans l es m êmes cas, le Tribunal o u l a Cour p eut également ordonner la p ublication de sa d écision dans l es journaux qu'il i ndique, à la
radio ou à la télévision.
(3) C es p ublications s ont faites aux f rais d u condamné.
(4) Les informations d ans la presse écrite, à la r adio et à l a télévision a insi que l es commentaires o bjectifs s ont l ibres.
Article 34 — F ermeture de l’établissement.
Dans l es c as où le T ribunal o u la Cour p eut ordonner la f ermeture d'un é tablissement c ommercial ou industriel ou
d'un local p rofessionnel ayant s ervi à c ommettre une infraction, cette m esure e mporte interdiction pour l e c ondamné o u pour l e t iers a uquel il a
vendu, c édé ou loué l'établissement o u le local professionnel d 'exercer le m ême commerce, l a m ême industrie o u la m ême
profession dans le m ême l ocal.
Article 35 — C onfiscation du « corpus d elicti ».

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) En cas de condamnation pour c rime o u d élit, le tribunal peut ordonner la c onfiscation de t ous biens meubles o u i mmeubles
appartenant a u condamné et s aisis, lorsque c es biens o nt servi d 'instrument à l a c ommission d e l 'infraction o u e n s ont le p roduit.
(2) En matière de contravention, cette c onfiscation ne peut ê tre ordonnée q ue d ans les cas déterminés par la l oi.
CHAPITRE I V
MESURES DE SÉCURITÉ.
Section I
L'INTERDICTION DE LA P ROFESSION.
Article 3 6 — I nterdiction d e la profession.
(1) L'interdiction d'exercer une profession p eut ê tre prononcée p ar décision motivée à l 'encontre d es personnes c ondamnées p our un
crime ou un délit de d roit c ommun lorsqu'il est constaté que l'infraction c ommise a u n r apport d irect a vec l'exercice de l a p rofession
et qu'il e xiste d e sérieuses craintes que cet exercice puisse constituer un d anger de r echute p our la p ersonne c ondamnée.
(2) Cette i nterdiction est prononcée p our u ne durée qui n e peut être inférieure à u n a n n i s upérieure à c inq ans, à c ompter d u
jour où la peine a été p urgée, s auf dans les c as où l a loi e n dispose a utrement.
(3) En cas de récidive dans l es c onditions prévues au p aragraphe 1 e t à l 'article 88 p our un c rime o u u n d élit de m ême n ature, l 'interdiction
devient p erpétuelle.
Section II
RELÉGATION
Article 37 — D éfinition d e la relégation.
(1) La relégation est un internement d'une d urée d e cinq à v ingt a ns sous un r égime d e t ravail e t de r éinsertion sociale p endant
lequel l es r elégués s ont, à défaut d 'établissement spécial, s éparés d es condamnés q ui purgent l eur peine.
(2) Des d écrets r églementent les c onditions de f onctionnement d e l 'établissement, l e r égime d e t ravail e t la r éinsertion sociale
des p ersonnes reléguées.
Article 38 — P ersonnes exclues d e la relégation.
Les c ondamnés âgés d e moins d e vingt­cinq a ns ou d e plus d e s oixante a ns à l a f in de l a p eine principale n e p euvent être rétrogradés.
Article 39 — C onditions d e relégation.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) ( Loi n ° 67­LF­1 du 1 2 j uin 1967) : Le r écidiviste p eut être r étrogradé s i, dans l e délai de d ix a ns, non compris les p eines p urgées et l es
mesures d e s ûreté privatives d e liberté, il a encouru, compte tenu d e l a p eine p rononcée p our l a nouvelle i nfraction commise, s oit :
a) Deux p eines d’emprisonnement pour u n c rime ou l a peine d e mort i nitialement c ommuée en p eine d ’emprisonnement ;
b) Une des condamnations p révues à l’alinéa a) e t d eux c ondamnations pour des i nfractions e ntraînant p lus d’un a n d ’emprisonnement;
(c) Q uatre c ondamnations p our des i nfractions e ntraînant p lus d’un a n d’emprisonnement.
(2) L e p oint de d épart du d élai d e d ix a ns s usmentionné est la date de l a dernière infraction s usceptible d'entraîner l a relégation.
(3) L es condamnations r etenues p our la r elégation d oivent ê tre d éfinitives et c hacun d es f aits m otivant c es condamnations doit ê tre postérieur
à l a c ondamnation p récédente d evenue définitive.
(4) L es condamnations qui o nt f ait l'objet d'une grâce, d'une c ommutation o u d 'une réduction de p eine s ont prises e n c ompte.
(5) I l n e sera pas tenu c ompte d e c eux q ui o nt é té e ffacés par r éhabilitation o u par a mnistie.
(6) L es c ondamnations prononcées contre d es mineurs âgés de m oins de d ix­huit a ns au m oment d es faits ne s ont p as prises en compte.
Section I II
SURVEILLANCE E T ASSISTANCE POST­CRIMINELLE
Article 4 0 — Définition e t durée.
(1) T oute personne c ondamnée à u ne peine p rivative d e l iberté s upérieure à u n a n peut, c ompte t enu des c irconstances d e l'espèce et
par décision m otivée, être placée par l a juridiction q ui l a c ondamne et pour u ne durée maximale de cinq ans s ous le régime de s urveillance
et d'assistance p ostpénales c omportant des o bligations g énérales e t, le c as échéant, des o bligations p articulières.
(2) L 'observation d e ces obligations p ar l e condamné est c ontrôlée par u n m agistrat d ésigné à c et e ffet, a ssisté d e s urveillants b énévoles o u
rémunérés.
Toutefois, c e contrôle e st e xercé par les a utorités p olicières l orsqu'il s 'agit d 'un i ndividu c ondamné pour un c rime ou d 'un récidiviste
condamné p our u n d élit.
(3) U n d écret d étermine les c onditions d'application du p résent a rticle.
Article 4 1 — Obligations g énérales ( Loi n ° 69­LF­2 du 1 4 j uin 1 969).
Les obligations g énérales q ui s 'imposent a utomatiquement à l a personne condamnée sont l es suivantes :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
1° É tablir son d omicile dans un lieu déterminé ;
2° R épondre aux c onvocations d e l ’autorité chargée d e la m ission de surveillance et d ’assistance ;
3° R ecevoir l es visites du s urveillant et lui f ournir l es r enseignements o u documents susceptibles d e permettre le
suivi d e ses m oyens d'existence ;
4° N otifier ou j ustifier a u supérieur h iérarchique les raisons d e ses changements d 'emploi o u de résidence ;
5° A viser le superviseur de toute absence excédant q uinze j ours et l 'aviser de son retour ;
6° O btenir l 'autorisation p réalable de l'autorité chargée d e cette mission avant tout d éplacement à l'étranger.
Article 4 2 — Obligations particulières.
Outre les o bligations générales imposées p ar l 'article 4 1, le tribunal peut imposer au condamné tout o u partie des obligations
suivantes :
1° É tablir sa résidence en u n ou plusieurs l ieux déterminés ;
2° N e p as paraître d ans certains lieux d éterminés, s auf autorisation s péciale e t temporaire ;
3° E xercer une a ctivité professionnelle, s uivre une formation ou recevoir u ne formation professionnelle ;
4° S e soumettre à des m esures de contrôle, d e t raitement ou de soins, même sous le r égime d e l'hospitalisation,
notamment à des f ins d e désintoxication ;
5° C ontribuer a ux c harges d e la famille ou verser r égulièrement u ne p ension alimentaire ;
6° R éparer l e dommage causé par l ’infraction ;
7° N e pas c onduire c ertains véhicules d éterminés p ar les c atégories d e permis en vigueur ;
8° N e p as f réquenter certains lieux t els que b ars, h ippodromes, maisons d e jeux ;
9° N e pas p lacer de p aris ;
10° S ’abstenir de tout e xcès de b oissons a lcoolisées ;
11° N e p as f réquenter certaines personnes condamnées, notamment c oauteurs ou complices d e l'infraction ;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
12° S ’abstenir de recevoir ou d ’héberger certaines personnes à son d omicile.
Section I V
INTERNEMENT EN M AISON D E R ETRAITE
Article 4 3 — Les m alades mentaux.
(1) E n c as d'acquittement p our cause d 'aliénation m entale de l 'auteur d 'un c rime ou d 'un d élit p uni d'une peine d 'emprisonnement
d'au moins deux ans, et l orsque l a l iberté du prévenu e st r econnue d angereuse p our l'ordre p ublic p ar l a j uridiction s aisie, c elle­ci o rdonne
son i nternement dans un centre sanitaire s pécial.
(2) C ette juridiction p eut s eule mettre fin à l 'internement a près avis de l 'autorité médicale c ompétente certifiant que l a l iberté de
l'interné ne présente p lus aucun d anger p our l'ordre p ublic.
Article 4 4 — Infirmité m entale.
(1) L orsqu'une personne a lcoolique, t oxicomane o u atteinte d'une infirmité m entale est reconnue coupable d'un c rime ou d 'un
délit puni d 'une peine d 'emprisonnement d 'au moins d eux ans en r apport a vec s es h abitudes o u s on é tat m ental e t que s a liberté est
reconnue d angereuse pour l'ordre public, l e t ribunal s aisi peut ordonner son i nternement d ans un é tablissement spécial.
centre de santé.
(2) L 'internement ne peut e xcéder deux ans p our le t raitement d'un a lcoolique o u d 'un t oxicomane e t cinq ans p our le t raitement
d'une personne h andicapée m entale.
(3) C ette juridiction p eut a bréger le d élai q u'elle avait fixé, après avis d e l 'autorité médicale c ompétente attestant que l a l iberté
de l 'interné ne présente p lus aucun danger p our l'ordre public.
Section V
DE CONFISCATION
Article 4 5 — Confiscation.
Les c hoses dont l a f abrication, l a p ossession, la v ente ou l 'usage sont i llicites s ont c onfisquées m ême si e lles n 'appartiennent p as a u
condamné o u si la p oursuite n 'a p as a bouti à u ne c ondamnation.
CHAPITRE V
D'ENGAGEMENT P RÉVENTIF.
Article 4 6 — Conditions.
(1) E lle p eut être prononcée par le Président d u Tribunal à l'encontre de toute p ersonne q ui, p ar s on c omportement, manifeste une
intention n on é quivoque de commettre u ne infraction de nature à t roubler l 'ordre public.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
la p aix p ublique, de s'engager personnellement et, l e cas é chéant, avec d es c autions s olvables, à p ayer la s omme f ixée s 'il c ommet u ne
infraction d e c ette nature p endant la p ériode déterminée.
(2) Le m ontant e st fixé e n fonction des possibilités d u salarié.
Article 4 7 — D urée.
Cet e ngagement p eut ê tre prononcé pour u ne durée d 'un a n, pouvant être portée à t rois ans d ans le c as d'un récidiviste.
Article 4 8 — E ngagement d es parents o u du tuteur.
Dans le c as où u n mineur de moins de dix­huit a ns a commis des f aits q ualifiés d'infraction, l e p résident d u tribunal p eut p rononcer c ontre son
père, sa m ère, s on t uteur ou son r eprésentant c outumier l 'internement prévu à l 'article 46 au cas où le m ineur commettrait des f aits d e même
nature d ans un d élai d'un a n sans q ue l a personne c ondamnée a pporte l a p reuve qu'elle a p ris toutes l es m esures nécessaires p our q ue l e m ineur
ne c ommette pas l'infraction.
Article 4 9 — R efus d’engagement.
(1) Toute p ersonne q ui n'a pas r especté l'engagement q ui lui a é té imposé o u qui n'a p as f ourni l a c aution r equise p eut ê tre immédiatement
emprisonnée j usqu'à s on acceptation ou jusqu'à l a désignation d e la o u des c autions s ans q ue l a d urée d e cette mesure p uisse e xcéder la d urée
de l a p ériode p révue d ans l'engagement.
(2) Sauf d ans le c as prévu à l'article 48, les o bligations spéciales v isées à l 'article 42 (1° e t 2°) p euvent remplacer l 'incarcération.
Article 5 0 — N on­respect.
(1) Si l'engagement n'a pas été respecté, la j uridiction saisie d e l'infraction o rdonne, e n cas de condamnation, l e p aiement de la s omme f ixée
sans p réjudice d es peines r elatives à l'infraction.
(2) A l 'égard du r edevable, cette s omme est r ecouvrée par les m êmes moyens que l 'amende et à l 'égard d u ou des g arants par toute v oie c ivile.
CHAPITRE V I
DU NON­CUMUL D ES PEINES.
Article 5 1 — N on­cumul.
(1) Lorsqu'une personne est p oursuivie p our p lusieurs c rimes, délits o u contraventions c onnexes, l a p eine la p lus s évère e st p rononcée.
(2) Dans le c as où une p ersonne f ait l'objet d e plusieurs c ondamnations p our c rimes ou délits r ésultant d e poursuites d iverses, la
jonction des peines p rincipales peut être ordonnée.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
cumulativement, l e total d es peines p rononcées ne p eut e xcéder l a p eine m aximale e ncourue p our l'infraction la
plus grave.
(3) Lorsqu'une p eine p rincipale e st r emise, c'est la peine commuée et non l a p eine i nitialement imposée q ui doit ê tre prise
en compte pour l e cumul d es p eines.
(4) La règle d u non­cumul d es p eines n e s 'applique p as à d eux condamnations dont l a p remière é tait d evenue
définitive avant la commission des f aits qui o nt donné l ieu à l a s econde.
(5) E n m atière d e c ontravention, les peines s ont t oujours cumulatives, à moins que le t ribunal n 'en décide a utrement.
(6) En c as d e condamnation pour plusieurs infractions, les peines autres que l es peines principales e t les mesures d e sûreté
sont cumulatives, sauf décision c ontraire d e l a juridiction saisie.
Article 5 2 (nouveau).­ — Ordonnance d 'exécution.
(1) Les p eines p rivatives d e liberté s ont e xécutées dans l 'ordre chronologique de notification d es certificats de
détention a u c ondamné.
(2) Les p eines accessoires et l 'internement prévus à l'article 43 sont i mmédiatement a pplicables, tandis que les
autres mesures d e s ûreté s ont a pplicables à l'expiration d e la p eine p rincipale ou de sa s uspension.
(3) L orsque plusieurs m esures d e sécurité d oivent être exécutées cumulativement, l eur o rdre d'exécution est le suivant :
a) I nternement dans u ne maison d e retraite;
b) R elégation ;
(c) M esures p ost­pénales.
(4) Si, au cours de l'exécution d e l 'une de c es m esures, le c ondamné encourt une p eine p rivative de liberté p our un autre
crime o u délit, l'exécution d e l a m esure de s ûreté e st s uspendue e t la n ouvelle peine e st p urgée e n premier l ieu.
Article 5 3 — D étention préventive.
(1) En c as d e détention provisoire, l a durée d e c ette d étention est i ntégralement d éduite de la p eine p rivative d e liberté
prononcée.
(2) Lorsqu'il y a eu détention p réventive et q ue la p eine p rononcée est u ne a mende, le t ribunal s aisi p eut
exempter l e condamné de t out o u p artie du p aiement.
CHAPITRE V II
CAUSES QUI FONT O BSTACLE À L'EXÉCUTION D ES PEINES.
Section I

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
ABROGATION SIMPLE.
Article 54 — C onditions d ’application et e ffets.
(1) En cas d e c ondamnation p our crime ou d élit à une peine d 'emprisonnement i nférieure o u égale à cinq a ns ou à une amende, sauf d ans le
cas p révu à l 'article 92 ( 2) et s i le c ondamné n 'a pas f ait l'objet d'une condamnation a ntérieure et n on effacée à une peine d 'emprisonnement, l a
juridiction s aisie p eut o rdonner, sauf d isposition c ontraire d e l a loi et p ar d écision m otivée, que l'exécution d e la p eine p rincipale soit
suspendue p our une d urée de t rois à cinq ans.
(2) La s uspension n 'a aucun e ffet s ur les peines accessoires et s ur l es m esures résultant de la condamnation.
(3) Si, p endant l e délai a insi fixé, à c ompter d u jour o ù le j ugement ou l 'ordonnance est d evenu d éfinitif, l e condamné c ommet un autre
crime o u délit suivi d 'une p eine d 'emprisonnement s ans mise à l 'épreuve, la peine a vec sursis est e xécutée prioritairement e t
sans c onfusion avec la s econde p eine.
(4) Dans le cas c ontraire, l'expiration du d élai produit l es e ffets p révus à l'article 6 9.
(5) Les d ispositions du p résent a rticle sont a pplicables e ntre p lusieurs p eines d e détention s uccessives.
Section II
PEINE A VEC SURSIS A VEC P ROBATION.
Article 55 — C onditions d 'application.
(1) Une p eine avec s ursis avec mise à l 'épreuve p eut ê tre prononcée d ans les m êmes conditions qu'une p eine a vec sursis
simple lorsque la peine est é gale o u s upérieure à six mois d'emprisonnement.
(2) Elle peut é galement ê tre a ccordée a ux p ersonnes p récédemment condamnées à une peine d 'emprisonnement avec sursis ou à
une p eine d'emprisonnement ferme d e m oins de s ix mois.
(3) La p ériode p robatoire n e p eut être i nférieure à trois a ns n i supérieure à cinq a ns.
(4) Sous r éserve d es d ispositions des p aragraphes 1 et 2 d u présent article, l 'article 54 est applicable a ux peines a vec sursis avec mise à l'épreuve.
Article 56 — L e r égime d e p robation.
(1) Le r égime de p robation comprend d es o bligations générales e t, le c as échéant, particulières d e surveillance e t d 'assistance.
(2) L'observation d e c es obligations p ar le c ondamné e st contrôlée p ar u n magistrat d ésigné à cet effet, assisté d e délégués d e probation
bénévoles ou r émunérés.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(3) L a d ésignation d u délégué à la probation e st f aite par l e magistrat c hargé de la surveillance q ui
peut la m odifier.
(4) L e magistrat du domicile d u condamné chargé d e la s urveillance peut à tout moment et par
décision m otivée s uspendre t out o u partie d es obligations spéciales ou l es m odifier sans
aggravation.
Article 57 — Obligations g énérales.
Les obligations générales i mposées par l 'article 4 1 a u c ondamné à l'égard du s urveillant s'imposent
automatiquement a u c ondamné placé s ous l e r égime de p robation à l'égard de l 'agent de p robation.
Article 58 — Obligations p articulières.
Outre les o bligations générales imposées p ar l'article précédent, l e jugement o u l 'ordonnance p eut e xiger du c ondamné avec s ursis
l'observation d e tout o u p artie des o bligations visées à l'article 4 2 d u p résent c ode.
Article 59 — Obligations d u d élégué.
(1) L'agent d e probation doit v eiller a u r espect p ar l e condamné d es obligations générales et p articulières a uxquelles il e st soumis; il e st
également tenu d 'encourager et de s outenir l es e fforts d u c ondamné e n v ue de s a r éinsertion sociale, notamment e n c e q ui concerne
sa r éinsertion f amiliale e t professionnelle.
(2) I l est t enu d e lui a pporter t oute l'assistance m orale e t, d ans l e c as où l e c ondamné aurait b esoin
d'une a ssistance m atérielle, il l ui appartient d e s aisir l e M agistrat d ésigné a fin qu'une a ssistance lui
soit a pportée par t out organisme d 'assistance ou d 'aide s ociale.
(3) Il d oit t enir ce m agistrat r égulièrement informé d e l 'exercice de s a m ission et l e s aisir en c as de d ifficultés.
Article 60 — Manquement a ux o bligations.
(1) Si, pendant la période p robatoire, l e c ondamné ne s e conforme pas à l 'une quelconque des obligations générales ou s péciales de s a
probation, le tribunal q ui a prononcé l a p eine p eut o rdonner l'exécution de l a p eine a vec s ursis.
(2) L'exécution d e c ette peine n 'emporte pas r évocation d 'un s ursis simple précédemment a ccordé.
(3) Si la suspension n 'a p as é té r évoquée e n v ertu d u p résent a rticle o u d e l 'article 5 4, l'expiration d e l a p ériode
aura l es e ffets d e l’article 69.
Section III
DE L A L IBÉRATION C ONDITIONNELLE.
Article 61 — Définition.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) La libération c onditionnelle e st la l ibération a nticipée d’une personne c ondamnée à une p eine o u à u ne mesure p rivative d e l iberté.
(2) E lle est accordée e t r évoquée par d écret.
(3) U n d écret f ixe l es c onditions g énérales e t les m odalités d 'octroi et de révocation d e la l ibération conditionnelle.
(4) C ette s uspension, s i e lle n'a p as é té révoquée, devient d éfinitive à l'expiration du terme de la p eine.
Article 6 2 — S uspension d es m esures.
(1) L e décret d e libération conditionnelle p eut suspendre l 'exécution d es mesures d'internement d ans u n é tablissement
sanitaire spécialisé, de relégation, de surveillance e t d 'assistance p ostpénales o u d 'interdiction d 'exercer une p rofession.
qui suivent l a phrase p rincipale.
(2) C ette s uspension devient d éfinitive c inq ans a près l'expiration d e la p eine principale.
Article 6 3 — D élai d’octroi.
(1) L a libération c onditionnelle ne peut être accordée a u condamné q u'après avoir p urgé la m oitié d e sa peine
ou la moitié de t outes l es p eines e n cas de cumul, compte t enu, le c as échéant, des mesures de g râce.
(2) E lle ne peut être accordée a u récidiviste qu'après avoir purgé les deux t iers d e sa peine.
(3) L a libération c onditionnelle ne peut être accordée à l a personne r eléguée q u'après cinq a ns.
Article 6 4 — R évocation.
(1) L a libération c onditionnelle peut être révoquée e n cas d e c ondamnation pour u n crime ou un d élit commis p ostérieurement ou d e n on­
respect des c onditions générales o u particulières de libération.
(2) E n c as de r évocation, le temps p assé en liberté c onditionnelle ne sera p as compté d ans l e r este d e l a p eine.
peine à p urger.
Section I V
SUSPENSION D ES MESURES P OST­PENALES.
Article 6 5 — S uspension d es m esures p ost­pénales.
(1) S ur proposition de l'autorité v isée à l 'article 40 (2), l e tribunal q ui a ordonné l es m esures post­pénales peut à tout m oment et par d écision
motivée suspendre l es m esures s péciales en tout ou en partie o u les modifier sans les aggraver.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) L a s uspension peut ê tre révoquée à t out m oment s elon l es modalités prévues pour s on o ctroi.
(3) L a d urée d e l a s uspension de ces m esures, m ême révoquée, e st c omptée d ans la d urée des m esures p ost­pénales.
Section V
GRÂCE, PRESCRIPTION, M ORT.
Article 66 — Pardon.
La g râce e st la commutation ou la remise p artielle ou totale, conditionnelle ou non, d e peines, d e mesures d e sûreté e t
d'obligations p robatoires.
Article 67 — La p rescription.
(1) L a p eine p rincipale n on purgée, ainsi que les peines accessoires e t l es mesures d e sûreté q ui l 'accompagnent, ne peuvent
plus être e xécutées après l 'expiration d es délais c i­après d éterminés à c ompter de la d ate d u jugement ou de l'arrêt
devenu définitif :
a) P our crime : vingt a ns ;
(b) P our un délit et une contravention connexe : cinq a ns ;
(c) P our t oute a utre contravention : deux a ns.
(2) L a p rescription est suspendue chaque fois q u'un obstacle de droit o u de fait, autre que c elui résultant de la v olonté d u
condamné, empêche l 'exécution d e la peine.
(3) E lle est interrompue p ar t out a cte d 'exécution de la peine avant l'expiation d u délai.
(4) U ne fois le délai d e prescription de la peine e xpiré, l a personne c ondamnée p ar défaut o u par contumace n e peut p lus c omparaître
pour l 'exécuter.
Article 68 — Décès.
Le décès d u condamné n 'empêche n i l'exécution d es peines pécuniaires sur ses b iens n i la f ermeture de
l'établissement ( ajouté par la loi n ° 67­LF­1 du 12 juin 1 967) : « ni la c onfiscation ».
CHAPITRE VIII
CAUSES QUI E FFACENT L A CONDAMNATION
Section I
LA R ÉHABILITATION.
Article 69 — Définition e t effets.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) L a réhabilitation, a cquise d'office ou par d écision d e justice, e fface la condamnation p our c rime ou délit et met f in à toute peine accessoire et à
toute m esure d e sûreté, à l 'exception de l 'internement en maison d e retraite e t de la fermeture d e l'établissement.
(2) E lle est indivisible et doit couvrir toutes l es condamnations n on e ncore e ffacées.
(3) E lle est dans t ous l es c as soumise au p aiement des f rais dus au T résor e t à l'indemnisation d e l a partie c ivile.
(4) L e montant des s anctions pécuniaires, a mendes, c onfiscations, p ayées p ar la personne réhabilitée, reste acquis a u Trésor.
(5) L a réhabilitation n e rétablit pas a utomatiquement l es d écorations e t ne réintègre pas automatiquement l a personne dans l es ordres d ont
elle a é té privée.
(6) E lle ne réintègre p as a utomatiquement d ans l es f onctions ou emplois publics, l es grades, l es charges publiques o u ministérielles et ne
donne p as lieu à u ne reconstitution d e carrière.
(7) E lle n’empêche p as l es d emandes d e révision v isant à é tablir l’innocence d e l a personne réhabilitée.
Article 7 0 — Réhabilitation d u droit.
(1) L a réhabilitation est a cquise de p lein droit p ar l e condamné qui n 'a f ait l 'objet d 'aucune n ouvelle p eine d'emprisonnement ou de
détention pour crime ou délit d ans l es délais s uivants :
­ A mende : c inq ans ;
­ P eine unique d'emprisonnement o u de d étention n 'excédant p as s ix mois : dix ans
;
­ P eine u nique d'emprisonnement o u de détention n 'excédant pas d eux ans : quinze ans ;
­ P eine u nique d'emprisonnement o u de détention n 'excédant pas c inq ans : vingt ans ;
(2) L a période est de quinze a ns s i le total d es c ondamnations n 'excède pas un an e t de vingt a ns si l e total des condamnations e st
supérieur à u n an mais n 'excède p as d eux a ns.
(3) L es condamnations p rononcées simultanément sont c onsidérées comme une s eule c ondamnation.
(4) P our les a mendes, l es d élais courent du j our du paiement o u de la prescription et pour l es peines privatives d e liberté du jour de
l'expiration de la p eine s ubie, compte t enu, le cas échéant, d es remises d e grâce, o u de la prescription.
Article 71 — Réhabilitation j udiciaire.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) La r éhabilitation p eut é galement ê tre demandée en j ustice par l a personne c ondamnée a près u n délai de cinq a ns pour l es personnes
condamnées p our u n crime et d e t rois ans p our celles condamnées pour u n délit.
(2) Ce délai c ourt à c ompter du j our d e l a libération p our les personnes condamnées à une peine privative de liberté et d u jour du paiement
de l 'amende.
(3) Les d élais prévus au p résent a rticle sont d oublés si les c ondamnés sont e n état de récidive légale ou ont purgé l eur
peine. E n cas de p rescription d e la p eine, l e d élai court à c ompter du jour où
la prescription d evient a cquise.
Article 7 2 — P ériode p ost­mortem.
(1) En cas d e décès d u c ondamné e t s i les c onditions légales sont r éunies, l a demande d e réhabilitation p eut ê tre suivie e t m ême
formulée par s on c onjoint, ses a scendants ou ses d escendants d ans un délai d'un a n à compter de la date d u décès.
(2) La demande d e réhabilitation déjà f ormulée peut ê tre suivie p ar l e ministère p ublic.
Section II
AMNISTIE.
Article 7 3 — E ffets.
(1) Sous réserve d es i ntérêts civils, l'amnistie efface la condamnation e t m et fin à toute peine p rincipale et a ccessoire et à toute mesure de sûreté, à
l'exception d e l'internement e n m aison d e r etraite et d e l a fermeture d e l'établissement.
(2) Sauf d isposition contraire, e lle e mpêche o u a rrête les p rocédures non engagées ou déjà e n cours.
cours.
(3) Sauf d isposition contraire, e lle n 'est pas a pplicable aux f rais dus au Trésor s i la condamnation e st d evenue définitive.
(4) Sauf d isposition contraire, l es frais, a mendes et c onfiscations d éjà p ayés par l e condamné r estent a cquis a u Trésor.
(5) Sauf d isposition c ontraire, e lle ne r établit pas a utomatiquement l es décorations e t n e rétablit p as automatiquement l es ordres dont l a personne
amnistiée a é té privée.
(6) Sauf d isposition c ontraire, e lle ne r éintègre p as a utomatiquement d ans les f onctions o u emplois p ublics, les g rades, les offices p ublics
ou ministériels e t ne donne p as l ieu à r econstitution d e c arrière.
(7) Elle n 'empêche p as l es d emandes de révision v isant à é tablir l 'innocence du condamné a mnistié
personne.
TITRE III
DE L A RESPONSABILITÉ PÉNALE.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
CHAPITRE I
DISPOSITIONS G ÉNÉRALES.
Article 74 — Peine e t responsabilité.
(1) A ucune p eine ne p eut être infligée, sauf à u ne personne pénalement r esponsable.
(2) E st pénalement r esponsable quiconque c ommet volontairement d es actes constituant l es é léments constitutifs d’une infraction a vec
l’intention que c es actes entraînent la c ommission de l ’infraction.
(3) S auf d isposition c ontraire d e l a l oi, la c onséquence voulue d ’une omission n’entraîne p as de responsabilité pénale.
(4) S auf d isposition c ontraire d e l a l oi, la r esponsabilité p énale ne peut ê tre e ngagée que s i les c onditions d u paragraphe 2 s ont réunies.
de.
Toutefois, en m atière d e c ontravention, l a r esponsabilité pénale e xiste, même s i l ’acte ou l’omission n’est pas intentionnel o u si la
conséquence n ’était p as v oulue.
Article 75 — Ignorance et mobile.
L’ignorance d e l a loi e t du m otif n ’affecte p as la r esponsabilité pénale.
Article 76 — Exécution de l a l oi.
Aucun acte o rdonné o u a utorisé p ar l a l oi e t exécuté conformément à l a l oi n e constitue une i nfraction.
CHAPITRE I I
CAUSES QUI É LIMINENT O U ENTRAÎNENT LA R ESPONSABILITÉ P ÉNALE.
Article 77 — C as fortuits et c ontraintes matérielles.
La r esponsabilité p énale ne p eut r ésulter d’événements f ortuits o u de contraintes m atérielles irrésistibles.
Article 78 — Démence.
(1) L a r esponsabilité pénale ne p eut naître d u f ait d'un i ndividu atteint d 'une maladie mentale telle q ue s a v olonté a é té a bolie ou
qu'il n'a p as p u p rendre c onscience du c aractère r épréhensible d e son acte.
(2) S i l a démence n ’est p as t otale, e lle constitue u ne excuse a tténuante.
Article 79 — Intoxication.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
L’intoxication n on v olontaire est c onsidérée comme u ne m aladie m entale.
Article 8 0 — La minorité.
(1) L e mineur de moins d e d ix a ns n’est pas pénalement r esponsable.
(2) L e mineur âgé d e d ix à q uatorze a ns pénalement r esponsable ne p eut être s oumis qu'à u ne seule des m esures s péciales p révues p ar la
loi.
(3) L e mineur âgé d e p lus d e q uatorze a ns et de m oins de d ix­huit ans p énalement responsable bénéficie d e l a c irconstance a tténuante
excuse.
(4) U ne p ersonne de p lus d e d ix­huit ans est pleinement responsable.
(5) L ’âge d e l’auteur est c alculé à la d ate de l a c ommission d e l ’infraction.
Article 8 1 — Menaces.
(1) L a responsabilité p énale n e p eut d écouler de l ’acte d ’une p ersonne soumise à une menace imminente et par ailleurs
inévitable de mort o u d e b lessure grave t elle q ue p révue dans le p résent C ode.
Toutefois, s i l'acte constitue u ne i nfraction p unie d e l a p eine d e m ort o u s 'il a eu p our e ffet de c auser la m ort o u l es b lessures visées c i­
dessus, l 'auteur n e b énéficie q ue d e l 'excuse atténuante.
(2) L e présent a rticle ne s ’applique pas à q uiconque s ’est v olontairement exposé a u r isque de t elles m enaces.
Article 8 2 — Crainte révérencielle.
L'excuse a tténuante est a pplicable :
a) A u m ineur de m oins de d ix­huit ans qui a a gi s ous la c ontrainte d e s es parents, d es p ersonnes a yant l a g arde ou l a
responsabilité c outumière ;
b) A ux e mployés, o uvriers, f onctionnaires q ui o nt a gi sous l a c ontrainte d e l eurs s upérieurs o u e mployeurs.
Article 8 3 — Obéissance à l ’autorité légale.
(1) L a responsabilité p énale n e p eut naître d ’un a cte accompli sur o rdre d’une autorité compétente à laquelle l’obéissance est
légitimement due.
(2) L es d ispositions d u p aragraphe p récédent n e s 'appliquent toutefois p as s i l'ordonnance est m anifestement illégitime.
Article 84 — L égitime défense.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) L a responsabilité p énale n e p eut naître d 'un a cte e xigé par l a n écessité immédiate de s e d éfendre ou d e d éfendre autrui, ou d 'un d roit
appartenant à soi­même ou à a utrui, contre u ne a tteinte i llicite, à c ondition q ue la d éfense soit proportionnée à l a g ravité d e l 'atteinte.
(2) I l y a toujours u ne j uste proportion entre l'homicide et l 'agression q ui fait c raindre soit la m ort, s oit des b lessures graves prévues p ar le p résent
code, soit u n viol o u une s odomie.
Article 85 — P rovocation.
(1) L 'auteur d'une i nfraction i mmédiatement p rovoquée p ar l e f ait i llicite d'autrui contre lui­même ou e n s a présence, c ontre son c onjoint,
son d escendant o u son ascendant, s on frère ou sa s œur, s on m aître ou s on s erviteur, le m ineur o u l 'incapable d ont il a l a g arde b énéficie
de l'excuse atténuante s 'il n'y a p as de d isproportion e ntre l a p rovocation et l a r éaction.
(2) L'homicide et les blessures s ont e xcusables s 'ils o nt été causés p ar des c oups o u d es v iolences g raves contre les p ersonnes.
(3) Elles sont également excusables si elles o nt été commises p ar l'un des é poux contre son c onjoint o u s on c omplice surpris e n
flagrant d élit d'adultère.
(4) L’infraction n ’est excusable q ue l orsque l a provocation e st de n ature à p river une personne normale de m aîtrise de s oi.
Article 86 — État de nécessité.
Indépendamment d e la légitime défense p révue à l 'article 84, l a r esponsabilité p énale ne p eut résulter de l 'atteinte p ortée à u n b ien dans le b ut
de détourner de soi­même o u d'autrui, ou d'un b ien appartenant à s oi­même ou à a utrui, u n
danger g rave, imminent e t par a illeurs i névitable, à c ondition q u'il n'y a it p as d e d isproportion entre le p réjudice à é viter et la m esure prise
pour l e p révenir.
Article 8 7 — Effets d e l’excuse a tténuante.
(1) Lorsque l a l oi p révoit une e xcuse atténuante, les p eines s ont réduites c omme suit :
a) Si la peine de mort ou la réclusion à p erpétuité e st encourue, la p eine s era réduite à u ne peine p rivative de l iberté d e
deux à dix a ns ;
b) Si u ne p eine est encourue dans l e cas d’un c rime, la p eine e st réduite à u ne peine p rivative de l iberté d ’un à c inq a ns ;
(c) E n cas d 'infraction, l es p eines p rivatives d e liberté et les a mendes m aximales s ont r éduites d e m oitié, le m inimum é tant c elui de
l'article 9 2 (1) du présent C ode.
(d) E n cas de cumul d ’excuses a tténuantes ou d’excuses a tténuantes e t de c irconstances atténuantes, l a p eine m inimale
est c elle de l’article 9 2 ( 1).
CHAPITRE III
CAUSES Q UI A GGRAVENT L A RESPONSABILITÉ P ÉNALE.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 88 (nouveau).­ — Récidive.
(1) Le récidiviste, s auf en c as de c ondamnation à la r éclusion à perpétuité, e st passible d u d ouble de l a p eine m aximale p révue :
a) T oute p ersonne q ui, après a voir été condamnée p our un c rime ou u n d élit, commet u ne nouvelle i nfraction q ualifiée
de crime ou d e d élit dans u n d élai q ui commence à c ourir à c ompter de l a d ate à laquelle l a c ondamnation e st devenue d éfinitive
et qui expire c inq ans a près l 'exécution d e l a peine p rononcée o u s a p rescription.
b) Q uiconque, a près a voir été c ondamné pour une contravention, commet u ne nouvelle c ontravention dans un d élai q ui
commence à courir à compter de l a d ate à laquelle l a c ondamnation e st devenue définitive e t q ui expire douze m ois
après l'exécution de l a p eine i mposée o u s on d élai d e p rescription.
(2) Les dispositions d u p résent article sont applicables e ntre p lusieurs peines de d étention s uccessives.
Article 89 — Fonctionnaires.
(1) La qualité d e fonctionnaire, d 'officier p ublic ou d 'agent c hargé d 'un s ervice p ublic constitue u ne circonstance a ggravante d e l a r esponsabilité
pénale à l'encontre de c eux d 'entre e ux q ui, sauf d ans les c as o ù l a loi r ègle s pécialement les peines encourues pour les crimes e t d élits
commis p ar eux, s e rendent coupables d'autres c rimes ou d élits q u'ils a vaient p our mission de p révenir o u d e r éprimer.
(2) La peine est a lors aggravée d ans les c onditions p révues à l 'article p récédent.
CHAPITRE IV
CIRCONSTANCES ATTÉNUANTES ET CHOIX DE L A P EINE.
Article 90 — Circonstances a tténuantes.
Des c irconstances a tténuantes p euvent ê tre a dmises p ar décision m otivée en f aveur du c ondamné, s auf d ans l es cas o ù l a l oi l es exclut
formellement.
Article 91 — Effets e n c as de c rime.
(1) Les peines prévues p ar l a l oi p our tout prévenu o u t oute p ersonne reconnue coupable d 'un c rime e t e n f aveur de l aquelle d es
circonstances a tténuantes ont été accordées p euvent ê tre r éduites à dix ans de p rivation de l iberté s i l e c rime e st puni de l a p eine d e m ort, à c inq
ans de privation de l iberté s i le c rime est puni de l a r éclusion criminelle à p erpétuité, à un a n d e p rivation de l iberté d ans les autres cas.
(2) Si, en application d es d ispositions d e l 'alinéa p récédent, une peine é gale o u i nférieure à d ix ans de p rivation d e l iberté e st prononcée,
le tribunal peut p rononcer contre le c ondamné une a mende q ui n e p eut e xcéder d eux m illions de f rancs.
Article 92 — Effets e n c as d’infraction o u d e c ontravention.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) L orsque des circonstances a tténuantes sont a ccordées en c as de d élit ou d e c ontravention, le tribunal peut réduire l a peine
privative de liberté à cinq jours et l'amende à un f ranc ou p rononcer u ne s eule d e c es deux peines.
(2) L orsque la loi ne p révoit qu'une p eine p rivative de liberté, le tribunal peut substituer u ne a mende d'un million d e francs au
plus e n cas de délit e t de v ingt­cinq mille francs en c as de c ontravention.
Article 93 — Choix d e l a peine.
La peine ou la mesure i mposée d ans les limites fixées ou a utorisées par la loi d oit t oujours ê tre f ondée s ur les
circonstances de l 'infraction, le d anger q u'elle p résente pour l'ordre p ublic, la personnalité du c ondamné e t s es possibilités
de réadaptation a insi q ue les possibilités pratiques d 'exécution.
CHAPITRE V
DE TENTATIVE ET DE COMPLOT.
Article 94 — La tentative.
(1) E st considérée comme c rime ou d élit toute t entative manifestée p ar un a cte t endant à l 'exécution d 'un c rime o u d 'un
délit et impliquant s ans équivoque la v olonté i rrévocable de s on auteur de c ommettre l 'infraction, si elle n'a pas é té
suspendue o u si e lle n'a m anqué à son e ffet que par des c irconstances indépendantes d e l a volonté d e s on a uteur.
l'infraction elle­même.
(2) L a tentative e st p unissable m ême si l e b ut recherché n ’a pu ê tre a tteint en r aison d’une c irconstance f actuelle inconnue de
l’auteur.
(3) L ’acte préparatoire n e c onstitue pas une i nfraction.
Article 95 — C omplot.
(1) I l y a c omplot d ès que la r ésolution de c ommettre une i nfraction e st concertée e t c onvenue entre d eux ou p lusieurs
personnes.
(2) I l n e peut y a voir de c omplot e ntre m ari e t femme.
(3) L e complot en v ue de c ommettre u n c rime o u u n délit, s'il n'a pas été suspendu ou s 'il n'a échoué q ue p ar des circonstances
indépendantes de l a v olonté d e s es auteurs, est c onsidéré comme le crime o u l e délit lui­même.
(4) L a personne qui s e r etire volontairement du c omplot a vant l e début d e l ’exécution bénéficie de l ’excuse a tténuante.
(5) L e conspirateur qui e mpêche l 'exécution o u q ui, a vant toute tentative d'exécution, i nforme les autorités administratives
ou judiciaires du c omplot e st e xempt de p eine.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
CHAPITRE V I
COACTION E T C OMPLICITÉ.
Article 9 6 — C oaction.
Un c oauteur e st u ne p ersonne qui p articipe a vec u ne autre p ersonne et en accord a vec elle à la c ommission d’une infraction.
Article 9 7 — C omplicité.
(1) E st c omplice d'une i nfraction qualifiée de crime o u de d élit :
a) Q uiconque, d e q uelque m anière que ce s oit, p rovoque l ’infraction o u donne des i nstructions p our la commettre ;
b) Q uiconque a ide o u facilite l a préparation ou la c ommission d e l ’infraction.
(2) L a t entative de c omplicité e st c onsidérée c omme une complicité e lle­même.
Article 9 8 — S anctions.
(1) Les c oauteurs e t complices s ont punis de l a m ême p eine que l'auteur principal, s auf d ans les c as o ù la l oi e n
dispose a utrement.
(2) Les c irconstances p ersonnelles q ui e ntraînent une exonération de responsabilité, u ne exemption, u ne
atténuation ou une a ggravation d e la p eine n'ont d 'effet qu'à l'égard de l 'auteur ou du complice d ans la p ersonne d uquel
elles surviennent.
(3) L es c irconstances r éelles n 'ont d 'effet s ur l e coauteur o u le complice q ue s'il pouvait l es prévoir.
Article 9 9 — R esponsabilité p our l es c onséquences p révisibles.
(1) Les c oauteurs et complices d 'un c rime ou d 'un d élit ou d'une t entative de c rime ou d e délit s ont é galement responsables
de t oute autre i nfraction d ont l a commission ou l a tentative est u ne conséquence p révisible d e l'entente o u de la c omplicité.
(2) Ceux q ui, connaissant l a c onduite criminelle d es malfaiteurs, leur f ournissent h abituellement d es l ieux de r etraite ou de
réunion seront é galement p unis comme complices.
Article 1 00 — C onservation.
(1) Le receleur e st la personne q ui, après l a c ommission d 'un crime o u d'un délit, soustrait le d élinquant o u ses c omplices à
l'arrestation ou à l a perquisition o u qui d étient ou dispose d es choses soustraites, détournées ou
obtenues au moyen de l 'infraction.
(2) Ces d ispositions ne sont pas a pplicables entre é poux.
(3) Les p eines pour r ecel sont p révues par d es d ispositions spéciales d e l a l oi.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
TITRE IV
LOIS F ÉDÉRALES.
Article 1 01 — Infractions aux t extes f édéraux.
(1) Les i nfractions a ux lois des États f édérés, n on prévues ou sanctionnées p ar l e présent c ode o u par d 'autres lois
fédérales, sont p unies, si la loi f édérale l e décide e xpressément, de peines égales ou inférieures à un an d'emprisonnement
et d'une amende d e p lus d e v ingt­cinq m ille francs s ans pouvoir e xcéder cinq c ent mille f rancs, ou de l'une ou l'autre
peine seulement.
(2) L es v iolations d es décrets ou o rdonnances l également é mis e n exécution d es l ois fédérales constituent d es c ontraventions.
LIVRE II
CRIMES, DÉLITS E T I NFRACTIONS.
TITRE I
CRIMES E T DÉLITS CONTRE L ES AFFAIRES PUBLIQUES.
CHAPITRE I
ATTAQUES C ONTRE LA SÉCURITÉ D E L’ÉTAT.
Section I
SÉCURITÉ EXTÉRIEURE D E L'ÉTAT.
Article 1 02 — Hostilités c ontre la p atrie.
Tout c itoyen qui :
(a) Participe aux hostilités contre l a République ;
(b) Encourage o u p ropose d ’encourager de telles h ostilités.
Article 103 — A utres crimes punis de m ort.
Tout citoyen e st coupable de trahison et passible d e la peine de mort, e t tout é tranger e st coupable
d'espionnage et également passible d e la peine d e m ort qui :
(a) Incite une puissance é trangère à d es hostilités c ontre la République ;
b) Livre ou o ffre de l ivrer à une p uissance étrangère o u à s es a gents d es t roupes, des t erritoires, d es
installations ou d u m atériel affectés à la défense n ationale o u des s ecrets d e défense nationale
ou s'assure par quelque m oyen q ue ce s oit la possession d'un s ecret de défense nationale e n vue d e le
livrer à une puissance é trangère ;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
c) En vue de nuire à la d éfense n ationale, endommage les bâtiments, installations ou
matériels o u pratiques, soit a vant, soit a près leur achèvement, des défauts d e
nature à l es e mpêcher de fonctionner n ormalement ou à p rovoquer un accident.
Article 1 04 — Peines de droit commun.
En c as d e r éduction d e la p eine p révue aux articles 102 et 1 03, l a peine p rivative
de l iberté est l 'emprisonnement.
Article 1 05 — Infractions p unies d 'une peine m aximale de d ix a ns.
Quiconque, e n t emps de p aix :
1. Dans un but a utre que c elui d e le t ransmettre à une p uissance étrangère, s'assure de l a
possession d 'un secret d e défense n ationale o u l e r évèle à une p ersonne n on qualifiée ;
2. Dans l’intention d e l es l ivrer à une puissance étrangère, recueille des
renseignements, des objets, des d ocuments o u des p rocédés d ont la c ollecte e t l’exploitation
sont s usceptibles d e nuire à la d éfense nationale ;
3. Pénètre par d es m oyens f rauduleux d ans une i nstallation, u n navire, u n aéronef o u un véhicule a ffecté
à la d éfense nationale ;
4. E ffectue d es d essins, d es r elevés o u des opérations photographiques ou topographiques à l'intérieur ou
autour d'installations militaires dans une zone interdite établie p ar l es a utorités m ilitaires et s ans l eur a utorisation ;
5. S éjourne e n v iolation d 'une interdiction é mise par l'autorité compétente, d ans
un rayon d éterminé a utour d'une i nstallation m ilitaire ;
6. Survole l e territoire d e la République à b ord d’un a éronef étranger sans a utorisation ;
7. Organise de manière c landestine un m oyen d e c orrespondance ou d e
télétransmission s usceptible d e nuire à la d éfense n ationale ;
8. P ar des actes n on a pprouvés par le Gouvernement, e xpose l a R épublique à d es représailles
9. (L.70.LF – 9 du 20 mai 1970) E ngage ou e ntraîne, sans autorisation p réalable des a utorités
camerounaises compétentes, dans des forces armées ou d e p olice étrangères, e t s e
livre à d es a ctivités nuisibles à l a défense n ationale o u à d es activités susceptibles d ’exposer
potentiellement la République à l a r ébellion ou à l ’insurrection.
Article 106 — I nfractions punies d'une p eine m aximale d e c inq ans.
Quiconque, e n t emps de p aix :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
1. E ntretenir des r elations d e renseignement a vec d es a gents d ’une puissance étrangère susceptibles d e nuire à la
situation m ilitaire o u diplomatique d e la République ;
2. R ecrute ou enrôle d es individus sur le territoire d e l a République et sans l ’autorisation d u
Gouvernement a u p rofit d’une force armée étrangère ;
3. E xpose l es citoyens à d es représailles p ar des a ctes n on approuvés par l e Gouvernement ;
4. S ans autorisation du Gouvernement, l ivre o u c ommunique à une puissance é trangère ou à s es
agents soit u ne i nvention intéressant la défense n ationale, soit des r enseignements, d es é tudes ou
des p rocédés de fabrication r elatifs à u ne i nvention de c e genre ou à une application industrielle i ntéressant l a
défense n ationale ;
5. P ar imprudence, négligence o u i nobservation des r èglements, l aisse s oustraire o u p rendre connaissance,
en tout ou e n p artie et m ême t emporairement, d 'objets, de m atériels, de d ocuments o u
d'informations q ui l ui sont confiés ou dont i l a la garde et dont l a connaissance pourrait c onduire à l a découverte
d'un s ecret de l a d éfense nationale ;
6. P ar i mprudence, négligence o u i nobservation des r èglements, l aisse e ndommager o u d étruire d es
objets, d u m atériel ou d es documents q ui lui sont c onfiés o u d ont i l a l a garde et dont l a détérioration o u
la perte p orte p réjudice à la défense nationale ;
7. L e fait d 'être chargé de fournitures, d 'entreprises o u d e g estion p our l e c ompte des f orces armées o u
d'être mandataire d'un fournisseur o u d'un sous­traitant f ait q ue le service e st manqué o u r etardé m ême
par s imple n égligence ;
8. Étant chargé d e fournitures, d 'entreprises ou de gestion p our l e c ompte des forces armées, c ommet une f raude sur
la n ature, la qualité o u la quantité des travaux ou de la m ain­d'œuvre ou des choses fournies
9. ( L.70 L F 9 mai 1970)­ S 'engage ou s 'entraîne, s ans a utorisation p réalable d es a utorités
camerounaises c ompétentes, dans d es forces a rmées o u d e p olice étrangères.
Article 107 — N on­dénonciation.
Tout c itoyen qui, e n temps de paix, n e déclare pas a ux autorités militaires, a dministratives ou judiciaires, dès qu'il en a
connaissance, une a ctivité de nature à n uire à l a défense nationale, sera puni des peines de l'article p récédent.
Article 108 — T emps d e g uerre.
(1) Tout citoyen o u r ésident qui, en temps d e g uerre et sans l ’autorisation d e l ’autorité compétente :
(a) entretient u ne correspondance o u des r elations a vec l es sujets o u l es agents d’une puissance e nnemie;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(b) E ffectue même i ndirectement u n a cte de c ommerce a vec u n s ujet o u u n a gent d ’une p uissance e nnemie o u a vec u ne
personne r ésidant s ur s on territoire.
(2) Q uiconque, en temps de g uerre :
a) Participe à une e ntreprise visant à démoraliser l’armée ou l a n ation dans le b ut de n uire à la d éfense nationale ;
b) C ommet l ’une d es i nfractions v isées aux a rticles 105, 1 06 ou 1 07.
(3) Q uiconque, en temps de g uerre, aura c ommis u n a cte de n ature à nuire à la d éfense nationale et n'aura pas é té autrement p uni,
sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d'un à cinq ans e t d 'une amende de 5 0 0 00 à 5 millions d e f rancs ou d e l 'une de c es d eux peines seulement.
(4) ( L 70 L F 9 du 20 mai 1 970) ­ P our l'application des a linéas 2 et 3 du p résent a rticle, l 'état d'urgence o u d 'exception e st
considéré c omme u n t emps de g uerre.
Article 1 09 — D éfinition des s ecrets d e d éfense nationale.
Est considérée c omme s ecret d e l a d éfense nationale p our l 'application d u p résent c ode toute information de q uelque nature q ue ce s oit
susceptible d e favoriser des e ntreprises h ostiles c ontre l a R épublique e t qui n'a p as d éjà été rendue p ublique.
Article 1 10 — E xtension aux p uissances étrangères.
Les dispositions d u présent article s'appliquent également aux actes commis a u p réjudice des p uissances é trangères auxquelles e lles ont été
étendues p ar décret.
Section II
SÉCURITÉ INTÉRIEURE D E L'ÉTAT.
Article 1 11 — S écession.
(1) Q uiconque, en temps de p aix, e ntreprend p ar q uelque m oyen q ue ce soit de p orter a tteinte à l'intégrité du t erritoire s era p uni
de l a réclusion criminelle à perpétuité.
(2) E n t emps de g uerre, d ’état d ’urgence o u d ’exception, l a p eine est la m ort.
Article 1 12 — G uerre c ivile.
Quiconque i ncite à la g uerre civile e n a rmant ou e n i ncitant l es h abitants à s'armer l es u ns contre l es a utres s era puni.
Article 1 13 ( nouveau).­ — P ropagation d e fausses n ouvelles
Quiconque a ura é mis o u propagé de fausses nouvelles lorsque c es n ouvelles sont de n ature à nuire aux p ouvoirs p ublics ou à la
cohésion nationale sera p uni d'un emprisonnement d e 3 mois à 3 ans e t d'une amende d e 1 00 000 à 2 000 000 de f rancs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 1 14 ( nouveau).­ — Révolution.
Quiconque t ente p ar l a violence d e m odifier l es l ois c onstitutionnelles ou de renverser les autorités p olitiques établies par c es
lois o u de les empêcher d 'exercer leurs pouvoirs sera p uni d e la r éclusion c riminelle à perpétuité.
Article 1 15 ( nouveau).­ — Bande armée.
(1) Quiconque, dans l e but de c ommettre l 'un d es crimes p révus aux articles 1 11, 112 e t 1 14 o u d'empêcher l'action de la f orce p ublique
contre l es auteurs de c es c rimes, organise u ne bande armée ou exerce en son s ein u ne f onction o u un commandement quelconque ou
participe a vec c ette b ande à l'exécution o u à l a tentative d'exécution d e ces crimes, sera puni de la r éclusion
criminelle à perpétuité.
(2) Tout i ndividu qui a ura s eulement participé à la réunion d e c e g roupe s era puni d'un emprisonnement de dix à vingt ans.
(3) Aux f ins du présent a rticle, u ne bande armée est t out r assemblement d ’au moins c inq p ersonnes, d ont l’une p orte u ne a rme
ouverte o u dissimulée.
(4) Les d ispositions de l ’article 9 5 ( 5) du p résent Code s ’appliquent a u présent a rticle.
Article 1 16 (nouveau).­ — Insurrection.
Quiconque, d ans un mouvement i nsurrectionnel,
:
a) P rovoque o u f acilite le rassemblement d’insurgés p ar q uelque m oyen que c e s oit ;
b) E mpêche p ar quelque m oyen q ue ce s oit la c onvocation, le r assemblement o u l’exercice d e la f orce publique o u s’en e mpare ;
(c) E nvahit ou d étruit des b âtiments p ublics ou p rivés;
d) P ossède o u s aisit d es a rmes, d es munitions ou des explosifs;
e) P orte un u niforme, u n c ostume ou u n a utre insigne o fficiel, qu’il soit civil o u militaire.
Article 1 17 — D éfinition des armes.
Outre l es armes e lles­mêmes, s ont c onsidérés comme des a rmes au sens d u présent a rticle tous l es objets p ortés avec l 'intention de
les utiliser pour c auser des blessures c orporelles ou d es dommages matériels.
Section I II
PEINES ACCESSOIRES.
Article 1 18 — C onfiscation s péciale.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
En c as de c ondamnation p our l 'un des c rimes o u délits prévus a u présent chapitre, l a c onfiscation prévue p ar
l'article 35 d u p résent C ode est p rononcée et p eut ê tre étendue même aux biens n 'appartenant p as au condamné.
Article 1 19 — c onfiscation des b iens illégitimes.
(1) E n c as de c ondamnation pour l'un des c rimes o u d élits p révus au présent chapitre, l e t ribunal p eut ordonner l a
confiscation des b iens du condamné, quelle qu'en s oit l a n ature, d ivisés ou indivis, dont l 'origine l égitime ne peut
être é tablie.
(2) E n t emps d e guerre, cette c onfiscation est toujours p rononcée.
Article 1 20 — C onfiscation générale.
En c as de c ondamnation p our l 'un des c rimes p révus a u présent chapitre, l e t ribunal p eut é galement ordonner l a
confiscation totale ou partielle des b iens légitimement a cquis.
Article 1 21 — C onfiscations.
(1) E n c as d e condamnation p our un c rime prévu a u présent c hapitre, l a d urée des
interdictions é numérées à l'article 3 0 n e p eut ê tre r éduite à m oins de cinq a ns.
(2) E n c as de c ondamnation à une peine privative de liberté p our u ne infraction, imposée e n vertu d u présent
chapitre, le tribunal p eut a jouter c es d échéances pour u ne période d 'au m oins cinq ans e t d 'au p lus dix a ns.
(3) L es m esures post­pénales prévues à l 'article 40 peuvent ê tre portées à d ix ans.
(4) E n c as de c rime o u de délit commis p ar un fonctionnaire, par u n agent ou employé d 'un s ervice public ou par u n
militaire, l'interdiction d'exercer u ne fonction p ublique p eut ê tre perpétuelle.
CHAPITRE I I
VIOLATIONS D E L A CONSTITUTION.
Section I
CRIMES ÉLECTORAUX.
Article 1 22 — F raude électorale.
(1) Quiconque, a u c ours d ’une é lection f édérale, f édérée ou municipale :
a) Viole l e secret d u vote;
b) C ela n uit à sa sincérité

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(c) Empêche les o pérations de v ote ;
d) Modifie l e r ésultat ;
(2) Q uiconque, par s imple i nobservation volontaire des dispositions l égales ou
réglementaires, aura involontairement provoqué l e m ême résultat, s era puni d'un
emprisonnement d'un m ois ou d 'un a n e t d 'une amende de 5 000 à 50 0 00 f rancs o u d e l 'une d e c es deux peines s eulement.
(3) L 'action publique s e prescrit p ar quatre m ois à compter de l a d ate de l 'infraction o u d u j our
du d ernier acte de p oursuite o u d 'instruction.
Article 1 23 — Corruption e t violence.
(1) Quiconque :
(a) Par l'octroi ou l a p romesse d 'un a vantage particulier d e q uelque nature que ce soit, ou
b) P ar l a v iolence ou l a m enace d’un préjudice particulier, influence l e v ote d’un é lecteur ou le d étermine à s ’abstenir.
(2) Lorsque l e vote i nfluencé e st celui d'un c ollège é lectoral o u d'une f raction d e ce collège,
la p eine m inimale d e détention e st de s ix mois, et celle d e l'amende e st d e 20 000 francs.
Section I I
COALITION.
Article 1 24 — Contre les l ois, le fonctionnement d’un s ervice e t la s écurité de l ’État.
(1) Seront punis d 'un e mprisonnement d e six m ois à t rois a ns, tout i ndividu détenant une a utorité publique e t tout
fonctionnaire q ui, avec d 'autres fonctionnaires o u agents, se c oncerte o u délibère :
a) L es m esures contraires a ux l ois ou aux t extes d ’application légalement a doptés ;
b) L es m esures, y compris l es démissions c ollectives, d ont le but principal est
d’empêcher ou de s uspendre l’exécution d ’un service public.
(2) S i ce c oncert a l ieu e ntre autorités civiles e t m ilitaires, l 'emprisonnement e st d 'un à dix ans.
années.
(3) Si le concert v isé au p aragraphe 2 c i­dessus a pour objet un c rime contre la s ûreté d e l 'État, la p eine
est l a mort.
Section I II
EMPIÈTEMENTS.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 125 — D u p ouvoir législatif.
Tout f onctionnaire q ui :
a) Interfère avec l’exercice d u p ouvoir l égislatif;
(b) Refuse d e m ettre e n œ uvre les d ispositions législatives.
Article 126 — D u p ouvoir exécutif e t du p ouvoir j udiciaire.
Seront punis d'un emprisonnement d e six m ois à cinq a ns :
a) Le représentant de l ’autorité exécutive qui é met d es ordonnances o u d es d éfenses devant l es tribunaux ou l es
cours de j ustice ;
(b) L e m agistrat q ui é met des o rdonnances ou des défenses aux a utorités e xécutives o u administratives.
Article 127 — P ouvoir j udiciaire sur certaines immunités.
Tout m agistrat ou officier de p olice judiciaire qui, contrairement a ux l ois s ur l es i mmunités, poursuit, arrête o u j uge une p ersonne
membre d es G ouvernements f édéral o u f édéré ou d es assemblées f édérales ou fédérées, s era puni d 'un
emprisonnement d'un à c inq ans.
Section IV
USAGE IRRÉGULIER D E LA F ORCE P UBLIQUE.
Article 128 — U sage illicite d e l a force.
Quiconque aura demandé ou o rdonné l'action ou l'emploi de la force publique c ontre l 'exécution d 'une disposition
législative ou r églementaire o u d'un o rdre légitime é manant soit des t ribunaux, soit d e l'administration, sera puni
d'un e mprisonnement de t rois à d ix a ns et d 'une a mende de 20 0 00 à 200 000 francs.
Article 129 — D éfaut d’obtempérer à une réquisition.
Tout c ommandant d e l a force p ublique qui n 'obtempère p as à une réquisition légale de l 'autorité c ivile sera puni d'un
emprisonnement de s ix m ois à d eux a ns.
Section V
PEINES ACCESSOIRES.
Article 130 — C onfiscations.
En cas d e condamnation p our l 'une des i nfractions prévues a u p résent c hapitre, l e tribunal peut prononcer l es déchéances
visées à l'article 30 d u p résent c ode p our une d urée d e c inq à dix ans.
CHAPITRE III

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
DANS L'EXERCICE DE LEURS FONCTIONS.
Section I
DISPOSITIONS PRÉLIMINAIRES.
Article 1 31 — ( L. n °77/23 du 6 d écembre 1977). D éfinition du fonctionnaire.
Pour l 'application d e toute l oi p énale, e st considéré c omme f onctionnaire tout magistrat, tout officier public ou ministériel, t out employé o u commis
de l 'Etat ou d e t oute a utre p ersonne m orale d e droit public, d 'une s ociété d'Etat ou d'économie m ixte, t out officier public ou ministériel, t out membre
des forces armées ou de la g endarmerie, tout agent d e la s écurité n ationale ou de l'administration pénitentiaire et t oute personne
chargée, même à titre o ccasionnel, d'un s ervice, d'une mission o u d'un mandat p ublic, a gissant dans l'exercice ou à l'occasion de
l'exercice de s es fonctions.
Article 1 32 — A ggravation pour l es fonctionnaires.
(1) S ous r éserve d e peines p lus sévères, le c as é chéant, tout f onctionnaire c oupable d e violences e nvers a utrui sera p uni d'un emprisonnement
de s ix m ois à cinq ans.
(2) L es peines prévues a ux articles 1 89 (copie d e documents administratifs) ; 206 (documents, e tc.), 2 07 (certificats o fficiels), 291 (1) (arrestation
illégale) ; 2 92 (travail f orcé), 2 99 (violation de domicile), 300 (violation d e correspondance), 3 10 (secret professionnel), 3 15 (falsification
de c ertificat) s ont portées a u double l orsque l e c oupable est un f onctionnaire.
Article 1 32 bis — ( Loi n° 97/009 d u 10 janvier 1997) T orture.
(1) Q uiconque, par l a t orture, c ause i nvolontairement l a m ort d 'autrui sera p uni de la réclusion à perpétuité.
(2) L a p eine e st l 'emprisonnement de dix (10) à v ingt (20) a ns, lorsque la torture f ait perdre d éfinitivement à la victime l 'usage d e tout ou partie d'un
membre, d'un organe ou d'une partie d e l'organe.
sens.
(3) L a p eine e st u n emprisonnement d e cinq (5) ans à d ix (10) a ns e t u ne amende de 100 000 à 1 000 000 de francs lorsque la torture c ause à la
victime une maladie ou une incapacité d e travail p endant plus d e trente ( 30) jours.
(4) L a p eine e st u n e mprisonnement de deux (2) à c inq (5) ans et une amende de 50 000 à 200 000 francs, l orsque la torture c ause à la victime soit
une maladie o u u ne i ncapacité d e travail d e trente ( 30) jours o u moins, soit une douleur o u des s ouffrances m entales ou morales.
(5) A ux fins du p résent a rticle :
a) L e t erme « torture » d ésigne tout acte par lequel une douleur o u des s ouffrances aiguës, p hysiques, mentales ou morales,
sont intentionnellement infligées à u ne personne par u n agent de la fonction publique o u toute autre p ersonne
agissant à t itre officiel, ou à son instigation o u avec son c onsentement exprès o u tacite, à des f ins telles que :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
d'obtenir d 'elle ou d'une tierce p ersonne des r enseignements o u des aveux, de la punir d'un a cte qu'elle ou une tierce
personne a commis, o u est s oupçonnée d'avoir c ommis, de l'intimider ou de faire pression s ur e lle ou sur u ne tierce personne,
ou p our tout autre m otif f ondé sur une forme quelconque d e discrimination.
b) L e t erme « torture » ainsi défini n ’inclut p as la d ouleur ou les souffrances résultant de sanctions l égales, i nhérentes à ces sanctions
ou occasionnées par elles.
c) A ucune c irconstance e xceptionnelle, quelle qu’elle soit, q u’il s’agisse d ’un état de guerre o u de menace d e guerre,
d’instabilité politique intérieure ou de tout autre é tat d’exception, n e peut être invoquée pour justifier l a torture.
d) L’ordre d’un s upérieur o u d’une a utorité p ublique n e peut être invoqué p our justifier l a torture.
Les conditions prévues a u paragraphe 1 de l'article 1 0 du présent C ode ne sont pas applicables aux
torture.
Article 1 33 — (Loi n° 93/013 du 22 décembre 1 993) Confiscations, saisies et p ublicité.
(1) L es d échéances de f onctions prévues à l 'article 3 0 d u p résent Code p euvent être p rononcées à l 'encontre des fonctionnaires
coupables des i nfractions p révues au p résent chapitre o u c ondamnés en v ertu de l 'article 89 d u p résent Code.
Toutefois, d ans l e cas des a rticles 134, 134 b is, 135, 1 36 e t 1 61 du présent C ode, les déchéances de l'article
30 s ont o bligatoirement prononcés.
(2) En cas d e c ondamnation pour les infractions p révues aux a rticles 134, 134 bis, 135, 136 et 1 61 du présent Code, le tribunal est t enu
d'ordonner l a confiscation p révue à l'article 3 5 et d 'ordonner la publication d e sa décision d ans l a presse é crite, à la r adio ou à l a télévision.
Section II
AVANTAGES ILLÉGITIMES.
Article 1 34 — (Loi n° 77/23 d u 6 d écembre 1977) C orruption.
(1) Tout f onctionnaire ou agent p ublic qui, pour l ui­même o u pour un tiers, s ollicite, accepte o u reçoit des offres, promesses, d ons
ou présents pour a ccomplir, s 'abstenir d 'accomplir o u différer u n acte de sa f onction, sera puni d'un emprisonnement de cinq à
dix ans et d 'une a mende d e 200 0 00 à 2 0 00 000 d e francs.
(2) L'emprisonnement est de 1 à 5 ans e t l 'amende d e 100 0 00 à 1 000 000 de francs si l 'acte n 'entrait pas dans l es attributions du
corrompu, mais a n éanmoins été facilité par sa position.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(3) Tout fonctionnaire ou agent public qui s ollicite o u accepte, pour lui­même ou p our un tiers, u n paiement en espèces o u en nature, en
rémunération d 'un a cte d éjà accompli ou d 'une abstention passée, est p uni d es peines p révues à l 'alinéa 2 c i­dessus.
Article 1 34 b is — (1) Q uiconque, p our o btenir soit l'accomplissement, l e sursis o u l 'abstention d'un a cte, soit l 'une d es faveurs o u avantages
visés à l 'article p récédent, f ait des promesses, o ffres, d ons, p résents o u c ède à des s ollicitations t endant à la c orruption, sera puni des
peines p révues à l'article 1 34, alinéa 1, c i­dessus, que la c orruption ait o u non produit son e ffet.
(2) Quiconque fait des d ons, des p résents ou cède à des sollicitations d estinées à rémunérer un a cte
déjà a ccompli o u une abstention passée s era p uni d es peines p révues à l'alinéa 2 de l 'article
précédent.
Article 1 35 — (L n °77/23 du 6 d écembre 1 977). I ntérêt à un acte.
(1) Tout fonctionnaire ou agent public qui, d irectement o u i ndirectement, p rend ou r eçoit un i ntérêt sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d'un à cinq
ans e t d 'une a mende d e 200 000 à 2 000 000 de francs :
(a) d ans des a ctes ou d es sentences s oumis à s a connaissance o u sur l esquels i l avait l a s urveillance, l e c ontrôle, l 'administration o u
prix;
(b) d ans les sociétés p rivées, c oopératives, s ociétés d'économie mixte o u participations f inancières d e l'État, c ollectivités
publiques, concessions s oumises à sa s urveillance o u à son c ontrôle ;
(c) dans les marchés ou contrats c onclus a u nom d e l 'État ou d'une autorité p ublique, a vec u ne personne p hysique o u morale
personne;
(d) dans une affaire p our laquelle i l e st chargé d 'ordonner u n paiement ou de p rocéder à une liquidation.
(2) Les d ispositions d u présent a rticle sont a pplicables aux a nciens f onctionnaires t els q ue définis à l 'article 1 31 du présent Code qui,
dans les cinq a ns d e l a c essation d e leurs f onctions par s uite de d émission, d e révocation, d e congé, d e mise à disposition ou d e retraite,
ou p our t oute autre c ause, p rennent un intérêt q uelconque d ans l es a ctes, o pérations ou entreprises visés ci­dessus e t a ntérieurement s oumis
à leur surveillance, c ontrôle, a dministration ou dont ils o nt a ssuré l e p aiement ou la l iquidation.
Article 1 36 — Participation à u ne affaire.
(1) Tout fonctionnaire qui, e n raison de s es fonctions, est chargé d e la s urveillance d 'une entreprise, d'une collectivité o u d'une concession,
ou d'exprimer d es o pinions s ur leurs a ctivités, c ollabore o u participe de q uelque manière que ce s oit à leur f inancement o u à leur a ctivité, s era
puni d'un emprisonnement d e six m ois à deux ans e t d 'une amende de 2 0 000
à 2 m illions d e francs.
(2) Les m êmes f aits c ommis d ans l es cinq ans de l a cessation d esdites f onctions s eront punis d es mêmes p eines, à moins q u'il n e s'agisse
du capital reçu à titre de dévolution h éréditaire.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Section III
INFRACTION C ONTRE L’INTÉRÊT P UBLIC.
Article 1 37 — Commotion cérébrale.
Tout fonctionnaire q ui accorde des e xemptions d e droits, t axes, redevances, p rélèvements ou c ontributions, o u l ivre à un p rix i nférieur
à celui p rescrit, d es p roduits de l'Etat f édéral o u fédéré, d 'une coopérative, d 'une collectivité ou d 'un é tablissement p ublic o u
soumis à la t utelle a dministrative de l'Etat, o u dont l 'Etat détient d irectement o u i ndirectement la m ajorité d u c apital, sera p uni d 'un
emprisonnement d e deux à d ix a ns e t d'une amende de 20 000 à 2 millions de f rancs.
Article 1 38 — D éficit n on déclaré.
Tout fonctionnaire q ui, a yant connaissance d 'un déficit d e caisse o u d 'un d éficit c omptable dans l a g estion d'un a gent public p lacé
sous s es ordres ou sa s urveillance, n 'en fait p as état à l 'autorité j udiciaire l a p lus p roche o u à s on supérieur hiérarchique, s era
puni d'un e mprisonnement d 'un à c inq a ns.
Article 1 39 — N égligence d u tuteur.
Le t uteur n égligent est p uni :
(1) En cas de d estruction, de détérioration ou de soustraction des biens visés à l'article 1 87, u n e mprisonnement d 'un m ois à un a n e t
une a mende de 1 0 000 à 5 0 000 francs ;
(2) En cas de v ol, d e soustraction ou de destruction prévue à l'article 1 88, u n e mprisonnement de t rois m ois à un a n e t
une a mende de 1 0 000 à 5 0 000 f rancs ;
(3) En cas de b ris d e scellés p révu à l 'article 191, u n emprisonnement de d eux m ois à deux a ns ;
(4) En cas d'évasion ou de libération p révue à l 'article 193, un e mprisonnement d e d eux m ois à deux a ns.
Section IV
INFRACTIONS C ONTRE L ES I NTÉRÊTS D ES I NDIVIDUS.
Article 1 40 — A bus de fonction.
(1) Tout fonctionnaire qui abuse d e ses fonctions p our p orter atteinte à d es droits ou i ntérêts privés s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement d e
trois mois à un a n et d'une amende d e 5 0 00 à 5 0 000 francs ou d e l 'une de c es d eux p eines s eulement.
(2) Si l'infraction e st c ommise d ans l e but d 'obtenir un avantage q uelconque p our s oi­même ou p our a utrui, la p eine est l 'emprisonnement
de t rois mois à trois ans e t l'amende d e 50 000 à 1 m illion d e f rancs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 141 — Violations d es d roits c ivils.
Tout fonctionnaire q ui empêche un c itoyen d 'exercer ses droits é lectoraux ou l e prive d e l 'exercice o u d e l a jouissance d es d roits
mentionnés à l'article 30 ( 1), ( 2), ( 4) o u ( 5) s era puni d'un e mprisonnement d 'un à cinq a ns.
Article 142 — Commotion cérébrale.
Seront p unis d 'un emprisonnement d e d eux à d ix a ns e t d 'une amende d e 2 0 0 00 à 2 millions de f rancs, t out f onctionnaire, n otaire,
commissaire­priseur, h uissier o u a gent d'exécution e t l eurs a gents q ui e xigeront des d roits, t axes, d roits, p rélèvements ou c ontributions indus
ou des a vantages matériels sans e n p ayer le juste p rix.
Article 143 — Favoritisme.
(1) T out fonctionnaire q ui décide par f aveur ou p ar i nimitié c ontre l'une des parties sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d'un à cinq a ns.
(2) S i ce f onctionnaire e st u n m agistrat, u n i nspecteur f édéral o u u n p réfet, la peine e st doublée.
Article 144 — Faux en a cte.
Tout fonctionnaire, n otaire, commissaire­priseur, h uissier o u a gent d 'exécution q ui a ura c ontrefait o u a ltéré, s oit dans le fond, s oit dans les
signatures, dates e t c ertificats, un a cte o u u n é crit q u'il e st t enu d e d resser, d e r ecevoir, d 'enregistrer o u d e n otifier, s era puni d'un
emprisonnement d e d ix à v ingt ans.
Section V
ABSTENTIONS DE C ULPABILITÉ.
Article 145 — Tolérance d ’un rassemblement.
Tout f onctionnaire q ui, ayant le pouvoir, l e devoir e t l a possibilité de d isperser un r assemblement t el que défini à l'article 232, n e l e fait pas, s era
puni d'un emprisonnement d e t rois m ois à d eux a ns.
Article 146 — Tolérance d ’une atteinte aux d roits i ndividuels.
Est p uni comme complice tout fonctionnaire q ui, a yant l e pouvoir, l e devoir et la possibilité d e l es empêcher, t olère soit des violences c ontre l es
personnes, s oit d es a ctes p ortant a tteinte à l a liberté individuelle ou a ux droits c ivils t els que définis à l'article 1 41.
Article 147 — Déni de j ustice.
Tout j uge q ui refuse, après avoir été d ûment requis d e l e f aire, de r endre u ne d écision s era p uni d 'un
emprisonnement d e trois m ois à deux a ns.
Article 148 — Refus d’un service dû.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Tout f onctionnaire, n otaire, commissaire­priseur, huissier o u a gent d'exécution qui, étant l également t enu d 'accomplir u n
devoir d e s a c harge, n e l'accomplira p as s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d e trois m ois à deux a ns.
Article 149 — Non­respect des f ormalités d u m ariage.
(1) Tout officier d e l 'état c ivil q ui d resse un acte d e m ariage s era p uni d 'un emprisonnement d e trois m ois à un an et d 'une amende
de 5 000 à 70 0 00 francs :
a) S ans s ’assurer que les c onsentements nécessaires à sa v alidité ont é té a ccordés ;
b) Sans observer aucune p ériode de v euvage q ui aurait p u ê tre p rescrite.
(2) L’infraction est punissable q uelles q ue soient l es c onséquences c iviles d e l’irrégularité.
Article 1 50 — Registres de l’état civil.
Tout officier de l 'état c ivil q ui i nscrit ses a ctes ailleurs que sur l es r egistres d estinés à cet effet ou qui omet d e les i nscrire sera p uni
d'un e mprisonnement d'un à t rois mois et d'une a mende d e 2 000 à 40 000 francs.
Article 1 51 — Négligence systématique.
(1) T out f onctionnaire q ui, p ar n égligence o u p ar e ntrave s ystématique, provoque des a journements, des r etards ou des d ésordres o u
s'abstient s ystématiquement d 'accomplir u n acte d e s a f onction, s era p uni d'un e mprisonnement d 'un à trois m ois et d 'une
amende d e 2 000 à 2 5 0 00 francs.
(2) L es p oursuites n e peuvent être engagées que sur plainte p réalable du ministre o u du secrétaire d 'État c oncerné.
CHAPITRE I V
ATTAQUES CONTRE L'AUTORITÉ P UBLIQUE.
Section I
OUTRAGES ET VIOLENCES.
Article 1 52 — Définition d e l’outrage.
(1) S ont qualifiées d 'injures, l a diffamation, l'insulte ou la menace faite s oit p ar des g estes, des p aroles ou des c ris prononcés dans
des l ieux o uverts a u p ublic, soit par un p rocédé q uelconque d estiné à atteindre le public.
(2) L es e xceptions p révues à l ’article 3 06 s’appliquent à l ’outrage.
(3) L 'action p ublique s e prescrit p ar q uatre mois à c ompter d e la date d e l'infraction ou du jour d u dernier acte de poursuite o u
d'instruction.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 1 53 — Outrage au P résident d e l a République e t à d’autres personnalités.
(1) Q uiconque i nsulte : l e Président d e l a République, l e Vice­Président de l a République, l a personne e xerçant t out o u p artie de s es prérogatives
ou un chef d 'Etat é tranger e st p uni d'un emprisonnement d 'un à cinq a ns e t d 'une a mende d e 2 0 0 00 à 20 m illions de f rancs ou
de l'une de ces deux peines seulement.
(2) Q uiconque a ura insulté les chefs de g ouvernements é trangers, les ministres d es a ffaires é trangères des g ouvernements é trangers e t l es
agents diplomatiques a ccrédités auprès du G ouvernement d e la République s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d e s ix mois à deux ans e t d 'une
amende d e 20 000 à 20 m illions de f rancs o u d e l 'une d e c es d eux peines seulement.
(3) La véracité d u fait diffamatoire n e p eut en aucun cas être r apportée.
Article 1 54 — (Ln° 90/61 du 1 9 d éc. 1990). I njures envers les c orps c onstitués et l es f onctionnaires.
Quiconque c ommet une i njure s ans pouvoir r apporter, dans l e c as d e d iffamation, l a vérité de l 'acte d ilatoire s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d e 3
mois à 3 ans e t d'une amende d e 1 00 0 00 à 2 000 0 00 d e f rancs ou d e l 'une des p eines seulement :
a) Les c ours e t tribunaux, l es forces a rmées, les o rganismes constitués et l es administrations p ubliques ;
b) En r aison de leurs f onctions o u de leur qualité, un m embre d u g ouvernement ou d e l ’Assemblée n ationale o u u n f onctionnaire.
Article 1 55 — Non­publicité.
Dans le c as où la d iffamation, l'injure et la m enace v isées aux a rticles 1 53 et 1 54 n'ont p as é té publiques, l a peine d'emprisonnement
ou de détention est réduite d e m oitié ainsi q ue l 'amende.
Article 1 56 — Violences envers les f onctionnaires.
(1) Q uiconque c ommet d es violences o u v oies de f ait contre u n f onctionnaire s era p uni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un à trois a ns e t d 'une a mende
de 5 000 à 100 0 00 f rancs.
(2) L a peine e st l 'emprisonnement d e c inq à dix a ns et l'amende de 2 0 0 00 à 500 000 francs si l es violences et v oies d e f ait sont
préméditées o u si elles c ausent, m ême involontairement, d es blessures telles que prévues aux a rticles 2 77 et 2 80 du p résent c ode.
(3) L e tribunal p eut dans t ous les cas p rononcer l es déchéances p révues à l'article 30 d u p résent C ode.
(4) S i l a v iolence et l’agression entraînent i nvolontairement l a m ort, la peine est la réclusion à perpétuité.
(5) S i l es v iolences e t voies d e f ait sont commises a vec l'intention de d onner l a mort, le coupable s era puni d e m ort.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Section II
RÉBELLION.
Article 1 57 — ( L. n ° 9 0­061 d u 19 d éc. 1990) R ébellion.
(1) Quiconque :
a) P ar quelque m oyen que c e soit, i ncite à la r ésistance à l’application des lois, d es règlements ou d es ordres
légitimes d e l ’autorité publique ;
(b) Par violence ou v oies de fait, e mpêche quiconque d'agir p our l'exécution des lois, des règlements ou des
ordres légitimes de l 'autorité p ublique.
(2) D ans l e c as v isé a u paragraphe 1 (b) ci­dessus, l a p eine e st d e 1 à 5 a ns d 'emprisonnement s i
l'auteur o u l'un d es auteurs est armé.
Article 1 58 — E n g roupe.
(1) Dans l e c as o ù l 'infraction prévue à l'article p récédent e st commise p ar a u moins c inq p ersonnes, l a p eine
sera d 'un à t rois ans d 'emprisonnement e t de c inq à q uinze ans d'emprisonnement si deux d'entre elles
portent des armes o stensibles.
(2) C ontre t out c oauteur qui p orte d es a rmes, même c achées, l a p eine est d e c inq à q uinze a ns
d'emprisonnement.
Article 1 59 — A brogé (Ln° 9 0­061 d u 1 9 déc. 1 990 modifiée L n° 9 1­007 d u 30 j uil. 1991)
[Caractère p olitique.
Dans les cas v isés aux articles 1 57 e t 1 58, l a détention e st substituée à l'emprisonnement s i l e
caractère p olitique d e l'infraction est é tabli.
Section III
INFLUENCE E T F RAUDE.
Article 1 60 — C ontrainte exercée s ur un f onctionnaire.
Quiconque, par voies de f ait ou m enaces, aura c ontraint un f onctionnaire à commettre un a cte o u une o mission i rréguliers
sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement d e d eux à dix ans et d'une a mende de 2 0 000 à 1 million de f rancs.
Article 1 61 — (Loi n ° 77­23 d u 6 d écembre 1 977) Trafic d’influence.
(1) Quiconque, a u m oyen de v iolences, m enaces, dons ou p romesses, c orrompt une p ersonne j ouissant d 'une i nfluence
réelle o u s upposée pour o btenir un a vantage quelconque d e l 'autorité publique, sera puni des peines de
l'article 1 60.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) E st puni d es mêmes peines t out f onctionnaire qui, p our l ui­même ou pour autrui, sollicite,
accepte o u reçoit d es offres, des promesses o u des d ons en vue d'obtenir d e l'autorité p ublique
ou d'un organisme placé sous s on c ontrôle, des c ontrats, d es s ociétés ou d'autres avantages r ésultant
de conventions c onclues avec l'autorité publique ou un organisme p lacé s ous s on c ontrôle, abusant
ainsi d e l'influence réelle o u supposée q ue lui c onfèrent s a f onction o u son m andat.
Article 1 62 — Fausses d éclarations.
(1) Q uiconque i nfluence la conduite d 'un f onctionnaire p ar d e f ausses d éclarations s era puni d'un
emprisonnement de q uinze j ours à trois mois e t d'une amende d e 5 000 à 50 000 francs.
(2) S 'il s 'agit d'une d éclaration f aite à l'occasion d 'un acte d e naissance, d e mariage o u de décès, l a
peine d'emprisonnement e st de t rois mois à t rois ans.
(3) E n cas d e fausses déclarations f aites sous serment, la p eine e st u n emprisonnement
d'un à cinq a ns.
(4) Est p uni d'un à cinq ans d'emprisonnement quiconque, p ar quelque m oyen que c e s oit, fait i nscrire
une c ondamnation a u c asier judiciaire d'un tiers a utre que l e condamné.
(5) E st puni d 'un m ois à un a n d'emprisonnement q uiconque, p ar q uelque moyen que c e s oit, o btient
indûment un extrait d u c asier judiciaire d 'un t iers.
Article 1 63 — Fraude à l’examen.
Quiconque commet u ne fraude aux e xamens ou concours e n vue d 'obtenir l 'entrée dans un service
public ou un diplôme, c ertificat ou t itre délivré par l 'Etat o u un service public n ational ou étranger,
sera p uni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un mois à t rois ans e t d 'une a mende de 25 000 à 2 m illions de
francs ou de l'une d e c es d eux peines s eulement.
Section I V
FRAUDE D ANS L A JUSTICE.
Article 1 64 — Faux témoignage.
(1) Q uiconque, dans u ne procédure, d onne u n faux t émoignage susceptible d'influencer la d écision e t d ont
le témoignage e st devenu i rrévocable est puni :
a) L orsque l a procédure est u ne instruction close par u ne d écision d e non­lieu, un
emprisonnement d e trois m ois à u n an et u ne a mende de 5 000 à 50 000 f rancs ;
(b) L orsque l e faux t émoignage e st donné d evant un tribunal statuant en matière pénale :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
­ E n c as d e contravention, u n e mprisonnement de s ix m ois à trois a ns et une a mende de 5 000 à 100 0 00 f rancs ;
­ E n c as d 'infraction, un e mprisonnement d 'un à cinq ans et une a mende d e 1 0 0 00 à 500 0 00 f rancs ;
­ E n c as d e crime, u n e mprisonnement d e cinq à dix a ns et une a mende de 5 0 0 00 à 2 millions de f rancs ;
­ E n c as d e crime puni d e m ort, la r éclusion criminelle à perpétuité.
c) L orsque le faux témoignage e st r endu devant t oute a utre j uridiction, d 'un emprisonnement d 'un à cinq
ans et d 'une a mende d e 1 0 0 00 à 5 00 000 francs.
(2) S i l e faux t émoin a r eçu d es cadeaux ou a ccepté des promesses, l es p eines d e d urée l imitée a insi que l 'amende sont d oublées e t la
confiscation des cadeaux est o bligatoire.
(3) L 'interprète j udiciaire qui déforme la substance d es p aroles o u d es écrits q u'il e st c hargé d e traduire e st puni c omme u n f aux
témoin.
Article 1 65 — F ausse e xpertise.
Tout expert qui dépose un faux r apport devenu irrévocable est p uni d es p eines prévues à l'article 164 (2).
Article 1 66 — P arjure.
Quiconque a ura f alsifié l e serment prêté ou i nvoqué e n m atière n on p énale sera puni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un à cinq ans et d'une
amende d e 10 000 à 5 00 000 francs.
serment.
Article 1 67 — D issimulation d’une p rocédure.
Quiconque, par l'un d es moyens prévus à l 'article 3 18 (1) c), l aisse son adversaire d ans l 'ignorance d es poursuites judiciaires
engagées c ontre lui sera p uni d 'un emprisonnement d e t rois m ois à deux a ns et d'une a mende de 20 0 00 à 1 million de f rancs
ou de l'une d e ces d eux peines seulement.
Article 1 68 — S uppression e t f abrication de p reuves.
(1) Q uiconque, d ans le but d’influencer u ne procédure j udiciaire :
a) Supprime des preuves matérielles ou e mpêche u n t émoin d e comparaître;
(b) F abrique ou utilise d e f ausses p reuves matérielles ou i nduit u n t émoin e n e rreur.
(2) Q uiconque o btient de quiconque la p romesse de n e pas d énoncer un c rime o u un d élit o u d e n e p as témoigner s era puni d es
mêmes p eines.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Toutefois, l e f ait d 'obtenir cette promesse de la victime ou d e son r eprésentant légal s ans recourir a ux m oyens
prévus à l 'article 161 n 'est p as punissable e n cas d 'infraction.
Article 1 69 — (Ln° 93­013 du 22 déc. 1993) Commentaires biaisés.
(1) Quiconque rend compte p ubliquement d'une p rocédure judiciaire non d éfinitivement j ugée d ans des c onditions
telles q u'il i nfluence, même involontairement, l'opinion d 'autrui contre l 'une d es p arties, sera p uni d'un
emprisonnement d e quinze jours à trois m ois et d 'une amende d e 1 0 000 à 1 00 0 00 f rancs.
(2) L e présent a rticle ne s’applique pas a ux r apports d’audience p ublique r édigés d e bonne foi.
(3) Lorsque l 'infraction e st c ommise p ar voie de p resse o u de radio, l a peine e st de trois m ois à d eux ans
d'emprisonnement et l 'amende de 100 0 00 à 5 m illions de francs.
Article 1 70 — Confiscations.
Les p ersonnes condamnées e n vertu du p résent a rticle s ont p assibles des p eines prévues à l'article 3 0 du présent C ode.
Section V
REFUS D'ASSISTANCE À LA J USTICE.
Article 1 71 — Non­intervention.
Quiconque, a lors q u'il p ouvait e mpêcher par u ne a ction immédiate, sans d anger pour lui­même ou pour les t iers, la
commission d'un c rime ou d'un d élit contre l 'intégrité c orporelle d'une p ersonne, s'abstient de le faire, sera p uni d'un
emprisonnement d 'un m ois à t rois ans et d 'une a mende de 20 000 à 1 m illion de francs ou de l'une d e ces deux
peines seulement.
Article 1 72 — Refus d’exonération.
Quiconque, s ans s 'accuser ni accuser son conjoint, ses ascendants o u ses descendants, peut f ournir aux a utorités
judiciaires ou p olicières la preuve d e l'innocence d 'une personne détenue p rovisoirement o u condamnée, même n on
définitivement, pour u n c rime ou u n délit, et s 'abstient de le faire, sera p uni d'un e mprisonnement d'un m ois à t rois
ans et d 'une amende de 2 0 000 à 1 million de francs, ou de l'une de ces deux peines seulement.
Article 173 — Témoin d éfaillant.
(1) Toute personne régulièrement citée en justice pour être e ntendue comme t émoin qui, s auf e xcuse l égitime, ne
comparaît pas ou r efuse de p rêter serment ou d e déposer, s era p unie d 'un e mprisonnement de six jours à
trois m ois e t d 'une amende de 1 000 à 50 000 f rancs.
(2) Quiconque, après a voir dénoncé p ubliquement un crime o u un délit et d éclaré p ubliquement e n connaître l es
auteurs ou l es complices, refuse d e répondre aux q uestions posées à c e sujet par l e magistrat c ompétent ou
s'y s oustrait, sera puni d 'un emprisonnement d e six jours à u n an et d 'une a mende d e 20 000 à 4 00 0 00 f rancs ou
de l 'une de c es deux peines seulement.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 1 74 — Exigence d éfaillante.
Quiconque, régulièrement r equis c omme expert, m édecin ou i nterprète, refuse s ans
motif légitime d'assister l 'autorité judiciaire s era puni d'une amende de 2 0 0 00 à 500 000.
Article 1 75 — A ssesseur o u j uré défaillant.
Tout a ssesseur o u juré q ui, sauf e xcuse légitime, n e r épond pas à l'appel d e s on n om ou r efuse de p rêter le
serment r equis p ar l a l oi ou s e r etire a vant l'expiration d e s es f onctions, sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d e
six jours à trois mois et d'une amende d e 5 000 à 50 0 00 francs.
Article 1 76 — Fausses excuses.
Les personnes v isées aux articles 173, 1 74 et 1 75 qui invoquent une f ausse excuse seront
punies d 'un emprisonnement d 'un à t rois mois.
Section V I
NON­RESPECT DE CERTAINES DÉCISIONS D E J USTICE.
Article 177 — I nterdiction de s éjour.
Quiconque se p résente d ans un lieu q ui l ui est interdit o u quitte un lieu q ui lui est a ssigné en vertu de l'article
42 d u présent code sera p uni d'un emprisonnement d 'un m ois à u n an.
Article 178 — A utres peines et m esures.
Toute personne qui :
(a) E xerce u ne profession interdite en v ertu de l'article 3 6 du présent
Code ;
b) R ouvre un é tablissement fermé e n v ertu d e l ’article 34 d u p résent C ode ;
c) Sous r éserve des dispositions d e l'article précédent, contrevient à l 'une des déchéances ou
obligations qui l ui sont i mposées e n vertu d es articles 3 1, 4 1 ou 42 du présent Code.
Article 179 — G arde d u m ineur.
(1) Quiconque n e r eprésente pas u n m ineur a uprès de la p ersonne à q ui la g arde a é té confiée par
décision d e justice, m ême p rovisoire, s era p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d'un m ois à u n an et d 'une
amende d e 5 000 à 1 million d e f rancs.
(2) S i le coupable a été déchu de l 'autorité parentale, la p eine d'emprisonnement e st p ortée à t rois ans.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 1 80 — Pension a limentaire.
(1) Q uiconque n 'aura p as servi intégralement l a pension qu'il a é té c ondamné à v erser à s on conjoint, à s es a scendants ou à s es d escendants
pendant plus de d eux mois sera p uni d'un e mprisonnement d'un mois à u n a n e t d'une amende de 2 0 0 00 à 4 00 000 francs o u de l 'une d e
ces d eux p eines s eulement.
(2) L e d éfaut de p aiement est p résumé v olontaire s auf preuve contraire, m ais l 'insolvabilité résultant d 'une faute habituelle, notamment
l'ivresse, ne c onstitue en a ucun cas u ne excuse v alable pour l e débiteur.
Article 181 — I nsolvabilité organisée.
Quiconque, après u ne décision de j ustice, même non définitive, p rononçant une condamnation pécuniaire, o rganise s on insolvabilité s era p uni
d'un emprisonnement d'un à c inq ans.
Article 182 — Reprise d e possession de b iens immobiliers.
Quiconque, dans les trois mois de s on expulsion o u d e son d épart volontaire, réoccupe u n immeuble a u p réjudice de c elui à q ui il a é té
attribué p ar d écision de j ustice, sera puni d'un e mprisonnement de q uinze jours à s ix ans.
mois.
Section V II
OBSTRUCTION À L 'EXERCICE DES S ERVICES P UBLICS.
Article 183 — R efus d ’impôt.
(1) Q uiconque o rganise p ar quelque moyen q ue ce s oit le r efus collectif d e l 'impôt sera p uni d 'un emprisonnement de trois m ois
à deux a ns et d'une a mende d e 200 000 à 2 m illions de f rancs.
(2) Q uiconque i ncite le public à r efuser ou à r etarder le p aiement de l 'impôt sera p uni d 'un emprisonnement de s ix mois à u n a n e t d'une
amende d e 5 0 0 00 à 1 m illion de f rancs.
Article 184 — D étournement d e f onds.
(1) Q uiconque, par quelque moyen que ce s oit, obtient o u conserve f rauduleusement un b ien q uelconque, m euble o u i mmeuble,
appartenant, destiné o u c onfié à l 'État f édéral ou f édéré, à u ne coopérative, u ne collectivité o u u n é tablissement p ublic o u s oumis à l a tutelle
administrative d e l 'État o u d ont l'État d étient directement o u indirectement la majorité d u c apital, e st p uni :
a) Si la v aleur de c es biens d épasse 5 00 000 francs, la r éclusion criminelle à perpétuité ;
b) S i c ette valeur e st s upérieure à 1 00 000 francs e t inférieure ou é gale à 5 00 000 francs, un e mprisonnement de q uinze à
vingt ans ;
c) Si c ette valeur e st é gale o u i nférieure à 1 00 000 f rancs, un e mprisonnement de c inq à d ix a ns e t
une a mende d e 5 0 000 à 5 00 000 francs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) L es p eines prévues c i­dessus n e p euvent ê tre réduites par l 'admission de circonstances atténuantes à moins d e d ix, c inq o u d eux ans
respectivement et u ne peine a vec s ursis n e peut ê tre accordée e n a ucune c irconstance.
(3) Dans l es c as prévus à l'article 8 7 (2) d u présent C ode, l a p eine m inimale e st r espectivement de c inq ans,
deux a ns e t un a n et l e sursis n e peut ê tre accordé q u'en c as de c irconstances a tténuantes de m inorité.
(4) La c onfiscation prévue à l'article 35 du présent C ode e st o bligatoirement p rononcée a insi q ue l es d échéances de
l'article 3 0 p our cinq a ns au moins et d ix ans a u plus.
(5) La p ublication de la décision d oit être ordonnée.
(6) Le p résent a rticle ne s'applique p as au détournement et au r ecel d'effets militaires visés d ans l es codes d e j ustice
militaire.
Article 185 — P erturbations dans l e service.
Quiconque t rouble le fonctionnement d'un s ervice public a uquel i l n'est p as partie s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement
de s ix jours à u n mois ou d'une a mende de 1 0 00 à 5 0 0 00 f rancs.
Article 186 — O pposition a ux œuvres.
Quiconque, par m enaces o u voies d e fait, s 'oppose à l 'exécution de t ravaux r égulièrement o rdonnés o u a utorisés par
l'autorité publique o u détruit, e nlève ou déplace une borne délimitant ces travaux, s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement
de t rois à d eux a ns et d 'une a mende de 10 000 à 50 0 00 f rancs.
Article 187 — D ommages a ux biens p ublics o u c lassés.
Quiconque d étruit ou détériore soit un m onument, une s tatue ou u n a utre b ien d estiné à l 'usage o u à l 'ornementation
du p ublic e t érigé p ar l'autorité p ublique o u avec son a utorisation, soit u n i mmeuble, u n o bjet mobilier, u n m onument
naturel o u u n s ite, inscrit ou classé, s era p uni d'un e mprisonnement d 'un m ois à d eux ans et d'une a mende d e 2 0
000 à 1 20 000 francs.
Article 188 — E nlèvement et d estruction des documents p ublics.
(1) Q uiconque a ura soustrait, détourné o u détruit des documents p lacés sous l a g arde de l 'autorité publique s era puni
d'un e mprisonnement d 'un à cinq a ns et d 'une a mende d e 1 0 0 00 à 2 00 0 00 f rancs.
(2) Q uiconque d étruit ou détériore d es registres, p rocès­verbaux o u a utres actes originaux de l 'autorité publique
sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement de cinq à dix a ns et d'une a mende d e 2 5 0 00 à 2 00 0 00 f rancs.
Article 189 — C opies des documents a dministratifs.
Quiconque, sans a utorité ni a utorisation, fait c opie d 'un document a ppartenant à u ne a dministration sera puni d 'un
emprisonnement d'un mois à un a n.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 190 — D étournement d es b iens s aisis.
Quiconque aura d étourné, d étruit o u e ndommagé des b iens s aisis o u m is s ous séquestre s era puni d'un e mprisonnement d 'un
à cinq a ns e t d 'une a mende de 5 0 000 à 1 m illion d e f rancs.
Article 191 — B risation des s cellés.
Quiconque brise les s cellés légalement a pposés s era puni d'un e mprisonnement d e s ix m ois à d eux ans e t d 'une amende de 1 00 0 00 £ .
amende de 50 000 à 500 000 f rancs.
Article 192 — C ommunications avec les d étenus.
Quiconque facilite i llégalement l es r elations d 'une personne légalement détenue a vec le m onde e xtérieur sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d e
quinze jours à six mois.
Article 193 — É vasion.
(1) Q uiconque, l également p rivé de s a liberté, s'évade o u q ui, a dmis à t ravailler hors de l a prison, q uitte l e lieu où i l est e mployé s ans
autorisation, s era puni d 'un emprisonnement de t rois mois à u n a n.
année.
(2) L a même peine e st applicable à quiconque l ibère un i ndividu légalement privé d e s a liberté.
(3) E n c as d 'évasion ou de libération a vec b ris ou violence, l a p eine e st l 'emprisonnement d'un à c inq ans ; si elle est e ffectuée a vec armes,
la p eine e st l'emprisonnement de cinq à d ix ans.
(4) S i le détenu e st accusé d'un crime o u condamné à u ne peine s upérieure à d ix ans, l a p eine e st d e c inq ans d 'emprisonnement.
Article 194 — R ecensement des i ndividus.
(1) L e recel de biens v olés p ar une p ersonne p assible o u p unissable d 'une peine c riminelle ou c orrectionnelle est p uni d'un e mprisonnement
de deux m ois à deux a ns.
(2) L a peine e st l'emprisonnement de d eux à dix a ns en c as de r ecel c ommis p ar u n i ndividu passible o u p uni de l a p eine d e m ort.
(3) L es c auses d 'irresponsabilité dans l a p ersonne d e l'individu cachées e t non e ncore j ugées n'ont a ucun e ffet sur la r esponsabilité du
destinataire.
Article 195 — S ouscription a ux a mendes.
Quiconque aura o uvert p ubliquement u ne s ouscription pour i ndemniser l e c ondamné des s anctions p écuniaires prononcées par u ne
juridiction répressive s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement de q uinze jours à s ix mois et d 'une amende d e 2 0 0 00 à 1 0 m illions de f rancs o u d e l 'une
de ces d eux p eines s eulement.
Article 196 — D échirement des a ffiches.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Quiconque e nlève, recouvre o u d étériore une a ffiche a pposée c onformément à l'article 33 du p résent c ode sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement
de quinze jours à s ix mois e t d'une amende d e 5 000 à 5 0 000 f rancs ou d e l'une d e c es d eux peines seulement.
Article 197 — Insulte ou d ommage causé à u n témoin.
Seront punis d'un emprisonnement de d ix jours à un a n e t d'une amende de 1 0 0 00 à 200 0 00 francs ou d e l'une d e c es d eux peines
seulement :
a) Q uiconque insulte u n témoin à cause d e s a déposition sans pouvoir, en c as de
diffamation, rapporter l a vérité du f ait d iffamatoire ;
b) Q uiconque c ause u n préjudice a u témoin e n raison d e s on témoignage.
Article 198 — (Loi n ° 9 3/013 d u 2 2 d écembre 1993) Publications interdites.
(1) Q uiconque p ublie :
a) U n a cte de p rocédure pénale ou c orrectionnelle avant q u’il n e s oit l u en a udience p ublique ;
b) U n compte rendu d es procédures au cours desquelles l’audience a été o rdonnée à huis c los ou d es
procédures d evant l es tribunaux p our mineurs ;
c) U ne décision condamnant u n m ineur accompagnée de t out m oyen permettant son i dentification ;
d) L es i nformations r elatives aux t ravaux d es c ommissions d ’enquête p arlementaires, à l ’exception d es c ommuniqués d e presse
diffusés p ar l e b ureau d esdites c ommissions a vant l a présentation d u r apport g énéral ;
e) L es i nformations r elatives aux t ravaux et aux d élibérations d u C onseil Supérieur d e la Magistrature, à l'exception de c elles
communiquées p ar l e Président ou l e Vice­Président dudit Conseil.
(2) Q uiconque r end compte d es délibérations i ntérieures des c ours e t t ribunaux s era puni d 'une amende de 1 0 0 00 à 3 m illions de
francs.
(3) E n c as d e publication d ans la p resse écrite, r adiophonique ou t élévisée, les peines sont d oublées.
(4) S ont interdits dans l es salles d 'audience et a u cours d es p rocédures judiciaires, s ous les peines prévues à l 'alinéa 2 ci­dessus :
(a) T out enregistrement s onore;
(b) T out tournage p ar c améra cinématographique, télévision photographique o u autre p rocédé s imilaire.
Article 199 — Registre d es propriétaires.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Tout propriétaire o u h ôtelier q ui, a u m épris d es r èglements, n'enregistre p as la personne q u'il héberge o u l'enregistre
sous un faux n om, s era p uni d 'un emprisonnement d e six jours à trois mois e t d'une a mende de 10 000 à 1 00 000
francs.
Article 200 — Inhumation i rrégulière.
Quiconque se sera d ébarrassé d 'un cadavre en violation des lois e t r èglements sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d e six jours à t rois m ois et
d'une amende d e 2 000 à 15 000 francs.
CHAPITRE V
VIOLATIONS DES GARANTIES DE L’ÉTAT.
Section I
CONTREFAÇONS.
Article 201 — Du s ceau de l’État.
(1) Q uiconque c ontredit l e s ceau de l'État o u utilise un sceau contrefait e st p uni d e la r éclusion c riminelle à p erpétuité.
(2) Q uiconque u tilise le s ceau d'État i ndûment obtenu e st puni d'un e mprisonnement d e dix à v ingt ans.
années.
Article 202 — Effets du Trésor.
Quiconque contrefait o u falsifie l es e ffets délivrés par le T résor Public a vec son timbre o u sa m arque, o u fait u sage des e ffets a insi contrefaits
ou f alsifiés, s era puni de la r éclusion criminelle à perpétuité.
Article 203 — Signatures, timbres e t p oinçons.
(1) Q uiconque c ontrefait o u falsifie l a s ignature du Président de la R épublique, du Vice­Président, d u Premier M inistre, d 'un m inistre,
d'un vice­ministre o u d'un secrétaire d 'Etat, ou un timbre n ational, ou un poinçon s ervant à m arquer les m atières d'or e t d 'argent, s era p uni
d'un emprisonnement d e dix à vingt a ns.
(2) Q uiconque a ura f ait usage desdits t imbres o u poinçons ou d es d ocuments ou matériaux p ortant lesdites signatures, t imbres o u
marques, qui seraient c ontrefaits o u falsifiés, s era p uni des m êmes p eines.
(3) Q uiconque a ura f ait usage desdits t imbres o u poinçons ou d es d ocuments ou matériaux p ortant lesdites signatures, t imbres o u
marques, authentiques mais i ndûment obtenus, sera p uni d es mêmes peines.
Article 204 — Marques e t i mprimés.
(1) Q uiconque c ontrefait o u falsifie :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
a) Le sceau, l e timbre o u la marque d ’une a ssemblée l égislative, d’une j uridiction o u d’une a dministration;
(b) P apier à e n­tête ou imprimés officiels d es assemblées législatives, des t ribunaux o u des a dministrations
(c) P oinçons et timbres d estinés à m arquer au nom d u Gouvernement d es i nstruments de
poids et mesures o u des m archandises ;
(d) M arteaux d'État utilisés pour le marquage f orestier ;
e) Les timbres­poste, l es empreintes d'affranchissement ou les coupons­réponse émis par
l'administration p ostale, a insi q ue les t imbres e t e mpreintes f iscales.
(2) Q uiconque a ura distribué, v endu ou utilisé l esdits sceaux, timbres, marques, estampilles, p apiers o u coupons contrefaits
ou falsifiés s era p uni d es m êmes peines.
(3) Quiconque aura d istribué, v endu o u fait u sage de c es o bjets, a uthentiques m ais i ndûment obtenus, s era puni
des mêmes peines.
Article 2 05 — E crits p ublics e t authentiques.
(1) Q uiconque c ontrefait o u altère, s oit d ans l e fond, s oit dans les signatures, dates e t c ertificats, un acte é manant d u pouvoir
législatif ou e xécutif, y compris u n passeport, o u du pouvoir judiciaire, o u un acte d ressé p ar une personne seule
autorisée à l e f aire, s era p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d e dix à v ingt ans.
(2) Q uiconque a ura f ait u sage de l'un d es a ctes p récités ainsi contrefait ou altéré s era p uni d 'un emprisonnement d e cinq
à d ix a ns et d 'une amende de 4 0 000 à 2 millions de francs.
Article 2 06 — ( Loi n ° 90/042 du 19 décembre 1990) D ocuments e t p ermis.
Seront p unis d 'un emprisonnement de trois mois à trois a ns :
a) Quiconque contrefait o u falsifie u ne carte d 'identité, un permis d e conduire, u n permis d e chasse, une
carte d'électeur, u n l ivret de famille o u un l ivret m ilitaire ;
b) Quiconque possède l ’un ou l’autre de ces d ocuments d élivrés à l ui­même o u à a utrui s ous u n nom d ’emprunt ;
(c) Q uiconque u tilise l ’un de ces documents c ontrefaits, f alsifiés o u émis sous u n nom d ’emprunt ;
d) Q uiconque fait u n usage frauduleux d ’un des documents s usmentionnés, q ui est v rai mais
appartient à quelqu’un d’autre.
Article 2 07 — C ertificats officiels.
(1) Quiconque contrefait o u falsifie u n certificat officiel e st p uni d 'un emprisonnement de six mois à t rois a ns.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) Quiconque fait u sage d 'un tel c ertificat est p uni des m êmes peines.
Article 208 — T imbres­poste e t t imbres f iscaux.
Quiconque a ura f ait usage de timbres­poste ou d e t imbres fiscaux déjà utilisés, a ura s urtaxé d es t imbres­
poste o u des t imbres f iscaux o u a ura a busé d'une f ranchise postale, sera p uni d'un e mprisonnement
de dix j ours à un an et d'une amende d e 5 000 à 50 0 00 f rancs.
Article 209 — D ocuments p ostaux.
(1) Q uiconque c ontrefait o u falsifie :
a) C artes d'identité p ostales nationales o u étrangères o u cartes d 'abonnement poste restante ;
b) L es é tiquettes, timbres, t imbres­poste ou c oupons­réponse émis par l e service p ostal d'un
pays étranger.
(2) Quiconque vend, o ffre o u utilise lesdits o bjets s era puni d es m êmes p eines.
Article 210 — I mitations.
Quiconque f abrique, vend, distribue o u utilise u n o bjet o u u n i mprimé présentant avec l 'un d es
objets o u i mprimés é numérés a ux articles p récédents d e l a p résente section u ne
ressemblance de nature à faciliter leur acceptation à la place d es o bjets o u i mprimés imités, o u
de n ature à causer u n malentendu dans l'esprit du p ublic, s era p uni d'un emprisonnement de
dix j ours à six m ois e t d 'une amende d e 2 0 0 00 à 200 000 francs.
Article 2 11 — F ausse m onnaie.
(1) Q uiconque :
(a) C ontrefait o u altère l e papier, l'or o u l 'argent e n c irculation d ans le
République;
b) Introduit sur l e territoire de l a République d e t elles m onnaies contrefaites o u a ltérées ;
(c) É met de telles monnaies contrefaites ou altérées.
(2) S 'il s 'agit d'autres monnaies, nationales o u étrangères, en circulation o u non, l a peine est
l'emprisonnement de dix à v ingt ans.
(3) Si l'altération c onsiste s eulement en la coloration d e m onnaies a yant o u n on c ours l égal d ans
la République o u à l 'étranger, l a peine e st de s ix m ois à cinq a ns d 'emprisonnement.
(4) D ans le c as de p ièces reçues e n b on état m ais remises en circulation a près c onnaissance
de leurs défauts, l a peine e st de t rois mois à trois a ns d'emprisonnement e t d 'une a mende d e
trois fois la v aleur p résumée desdites pièces.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 212 — Instruments contrefaits.
Quiconque, sans autorisation, fabrique o u p ossède des i nstruments, a ppareils, m achines o u matériaux d estinés à contrefaire l e s ceau
de l 'Etat, les effets publics, les p oinçons, timbres e t m arques o u les m onnaies nationales ou étrangères, sera puni d 'un emprisonnement
de c inq à dix ans et d 'une amende de 5 0 0 00 à 1 million de f rancs.
Article 213 — Détention illégale.
Quiconque, sans a utorisation, possède un o bjet o u un document v isé a ux articles 2 01 et 211 d u présent
Code sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d'un à c inq ans.
Article 214 — Peines c omplémentaires.
(1) Les déchéances de l 'article 30 d u p résent Code p euvent ê tre prononcées contre l es c oupables de l'une des infractions
visées a ux a rticles précédents de la p résente section.
(2) Pour toutes les i nfractions prévues au p résent a rticle, la c onfiscation p révue à l’article 35 du présent C ode est o bligatoire.
Section I I
USURPATION.
Article 215 — Fabrication de l a m onnaie.
Quiconque, sans autorisation :
(a) Fabrique des p ièces d e m onnaie sous q uelque forme ou dénomination q ue c e soit ou des billets payables au porteur ou
introduit, e xpose o u m et en c irculation d es p ièces ou des billets ainsi f abriqués ;
(b) Fabrique ou d étient d es m achines, des d ispositifs, des instruments ou des matériaux q ui p euvent être utilisés pour l a
fabrication de m onnaie ou d e b illets d e b anque q ui p euvent être confondus avec la m onnaie légale.
Article 216 — Usurpation d e f onctions.
(1) Q uiconque, s ans autorisation, s 'immisce dans l es fonctions publiques, soit c iviles, s oit m ilitaires, ou accomplit
les a ctes de l 'une de c es f onctions, sera p uni d'un e mprisonnement d e six mois à c inq ans.
(2) La p eine est d e trois mois à deux ans d 'emprisonnement pour l e f onctionnaire qui continue à exercer s es f onctions après n otification
officielle de l a cessation temporaire ou d éfinitive desdites f onctions.
(3) L es d échéances p révues à l 'article 30 du présent Code peuvent é galement être p rononcées.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(4) Dans l e cas où l e c oupable profite d e c ette usurpation p our commettre l'une d es infractions visées a u
chapitre I II d u présent t itre, l es peines qu'il e ncourt s ont celles prévues pour le f onctionnaire lui­même.
Article 2 17 — C élébration du mariage.
Seront p unis d 'une a mende de 5 0 00 à 30 0 00 francs et, e n c as de r écidive, d 'un e mprisonnement d 'un à c inq ans :
(1) Le ministre d u c ulte qui, n'étant pas a utorisé à c élébrer u n m ariage c ivil, procède à l a c érémonie r eligieuse s ans
avoir été m uni d 'un a cte de mariage p réalablement reçu par l'officier de l'état civil ;
(2) Le ministre d u c ulte autorisé à c élébrer u n mariage c ivil :
(a) C élèbre u niquement la cérémonie religieuse du mariage o u ;
b) C élèbre u n mariage c ivil sans a voir é té muni d 'un certificat de l'officier d e l'état civil attestant l'absence d e tout
empêchement au m ariage p rojeté.
Article 2 18 — U surpation d’uniforme et de décoration.
Quiconque porte publiquement un uniforme o u une décoration a uxquels il n 'a pas droit o u qui présente avec e ux u ne
ressemblance de n ature à induire en erreur sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d e trois m ois à d eux a ns e t d'une amende de 5 0 00
à 50 000 francs o u de l'une de c es deux p eines s eulement.
Article 219 — U surpation d’un t itre.
Quiconque fait u n usage illicite d'un t itre a ttaché à u ne profession l également r églementée, d 'un diplôme officiel ou
d'une qualité dont l es c onditions o nt été fixées p ar l'autorité publique, s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d e trois m ois à deux a ns
et d 'une amende d e 100 000 à 2 m illions d e francs ou de l'une d e c es deux p eines seulement.
Article 220 — T itre h onorifique.
Quiconque fait u sage p ubliquement d 'un t itre honorifique a uquel il n'a pas d roit sera puni d'une amende d e 5 0 00 à 2 m illions d e f rancs.
Article 221 — D ispositions communes.
(1) L es t rois a rticles p récédents sont applicables aux p orteurs de costumes, u niformes, d écorations et
titres.
(2) E lles n e s'appliquent t outefois p as a ux acteurs d 'une représentation p ublique n i a ux jeux d'enfants.
(3) E n c as d e condamnation p our l'une des i nfractions v isées aux trois a rticles p récédents, le t ribunal doit o rdonner que c ette
décision soit mentionnée en marge d es a ctes authentiques ou des a ctes d'état civil dans l esquels l e t itre a é té i ndûment
pris. I l peut également en ordonner l a publication.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Section III
GARANTIES DE L'ÉCONOMIE NATIONALE.
Article 2 22 — A tteinte a u crédit d e l’État.
(1) Q uiconque, p ar q uelque moyen que c e soit e t dans l e but d e nuire au crédit d e l'État, p ar q uelque moyen q ue ce soit et avec
dans le but de nuire a u crédit d e l'État, sera puni d'un e mprisonnement de trois mois à d eux a ns et d'une a mende de 2 00 0 00 à 2 m illions d e f rancs :
a) Répand dans l e p ublic d es a llégations fausses ou t rompeuses de n ature à ébranler sa confiance d ans l a s olidité de l a m onnaie,
la v aleur des f onds publics de t oute nature, ceux d es c oopératives, collectivités ou é tablissements, o u d es f onds p ublics soumis a u
contrôle administratif de l 'État, o u d ans l esquels l'État d étient d irectement ou i ndirectement la m ajorité du c apital ;
(b) Encourage le p ublic soit à retirer d es f onds des fonds p ublics ou d es i nstitutions tenues p ar l a l oi d'effectuer
leurs versements dans l es fonds publics, soit à v endre d es t itres de r ente ou d 'autres titres publics, ou l e dissuade
d'en acheter o u d 'y souscrire.
(2) En c as de condamnation, l e tribunal doit o rdonner la p ublication de s a d écision.
Article 2 23 — R efus de m onnaie.
Quiconque refuse d es monnaies ayant c ours l égal dans l a R épublique dans l a l imite de l eur c ours l égal sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement de d ix
jours à trois m ois e t d 'une a mende d e 1 000 à 1 00 0 00 f rancs o u d e l 'une d e c es deux p eines seulement.
Article 2 24 — A tteinte a u d éveloppement n ational.
Quiconque, dans l e b ut de n uire a u d éveloppement n ational, transfère à l 'étranger d u p ersonnel s pécialisé o u l ivre à l 'étranger d es s ecrets
industriels ou commerciaux sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement de s ix mois à d eux a ns e t d 'une amende de 1 00 0 00 à 5 millions de f rancs.
Article 2 25 — Détournement de p rêt.
Quiconque, a yant o btenu un p rêt d 'argent o u u ne s ubvention de l 'Etat f édéral ou f édéré, d'une c oopérative, d'une c ollectivité ou d 'un
établissement visé à l 'article 184 du p résent c ode, l'utilise à d'autres fins que c elles prévues, sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d'un à d ix
ans e t d 'une a mende de 1 0 0 00 à 1 m illion de f rancs.
Article 2 26 — Violation d es r ègles d’emballage.
Quiconque contrevient a ux p rescriptions d'emballage r elatives a ux p roduits destinés à l 'exportation sera p uni d'une amende de 5 0 0 00 à 4 m illions
de francs et d e la c onfiscation d es marchandises.
TITRE II

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
CRIMES E T D ÉLITS CONTRE L 'INTÉRÊT G ÉNÉRAL.
CHAPITRE I
ATTAQUES C ONTRE L A S ÉCURITÉ P UBLIQUE.
Article 227 — Incendie e t destruction.
(1) Quiconque, même s 'il e n est le p ropriétaire, met l e f eu directement o u indirectement :
a) A ux lieux utilisés comme h abitation par d’autres;
(b) À tout v éhicule terrestre, maritime ou aérien contenant une o u plusieurs p ersonnes;
(c) Aux mines ou à leurs dépendances lorsqu’elles sont e n exploitation.
(2) Les d estructions effectuées dans les m êmes c onditions sont p unies de la même peine.
Article 228 — Activités d angereuses.
(1) Quiconque ne prend p as les p récautions n écessaires p our p révenir l es dommages corporels à a utrui
qui p ourraient r ésulter d e son activité d angereuse sera puni d'un emprisonnement de s ix jours à s ix m ois.
(2) Quiconque, par u ne imprudence g rave, r isque de m ettre autrui e n danger sera p uni d'un emprisonnement
de t rois mois à trois a ns et d'une amende d e 5 000 à 500 0 00 f rancs ou de l'une d e ces d eux p eines seulement :
(a) E n u tilisant le f eu, des e xplosifs, des c arburants ou d es moyens m écaniques ou électriques, ou ;
(b) En d étruisant, m ême p artiellement, des o uvrages ou des b âtiments habités m ême s'il e n est propriétaire ; ou
(c) En fournissant d es s oins m édicaux ou chirurgicaux o u en fournissant o u en administrant
des m édicaments ou d’autres produits ; ou
(d) Conduire, a rrêter ou abandonner u n véhicule o u u n animal s ur la voie publique.
(3) Quiconque c onduit un véhicule en état d'ivresse o u d 'ivresse est puni des mêmes p eines.
(4) D ans les cas prévus a u paragraphe 2, lettre d ), e t au paragraphe 3, le t ribunal p eut
ordonner le retrait du permis d e conduire ou l 'interdiction d e l'obtenir p our u ne d urée maximale de deux ans.
Article 229 — Substances explosives.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Quiconque contrevient a ux r èglements concernant l a f abrication, l e s tockage, le t ransport,
l'importation, l 'exportation e t l e c ommerce des s ubstances explosives s era p uni d 'un
emprisonnement d 'un m ois à u n a n e t d 'une amende d e 2 0 00 à 100 0 00 f rancs o u d e l 'une
de ces deux peines seulement.
Article 2 30 — V oies p ubliques.
(1) Q uiconque, sans autorisation, gêne l 'usage d 'une voie publique o u d 'une v oie
navigable ou e n r end l'usage d ifficile e n d éformant la c haussée ou e n d étournant le
cours d e l a voie n avigable, soit par construction, s oit par usage impropre, soit par
exploitation des t errains a djacents, s era puni d'un emprisonnement d'un mois à d eux a ns.
(2) Q uiconque, étant chargé d e l'entretien d'une voie publique o u d 'un o uvrage s'y rapportant, ne s 'y conforme pas,
sera p uni de l a même peine.
CHAPITRE II
ATTENTATS À LA P AIX P UBLIQUE.
Article 2 31 — Réunions et m anifestations.
Toute personne qui :
a) P articipe à l'organisation d 'une r éunion ou d'une manifestation d ans un lieu ouvert
au p ublic sans a voir fait l a déclaration q ui p ourrait ê tre r equise ou avant l'expiration d u
préavis requis, o u après n otification d e l'interdiction l égale ;
b) A vant l adite d éclaration ou a près l adite interdiction, e nvoyer par tout m oyen une
sommation à y p rendre p art ;
(c) Fait u ne d éclaration s usceptible d’induire l es a utorités en e rreur s ur les c onditions o u l e
but de la réunion o u d e la m anifestation p révue.
Article 232 — Rassemblement.
(1) Un r assemblement d ésigne toute r éunion sur l a voie p ublique d'au moins cinq p ersonnes,
susceptible d e troubler la paix publique.
(2) Quiconque, faisant partie d 'un rassemblement, ne le q uitte pas à l a première
convocation d e l'autorité compétente s era puni d'un e mprisonnement d e quinze j ours à s ix m ois.
(3) S i l e r assemblement n'a p u être d ispersé q ue par l a f orce, l a p eine est d oublée c ontre ceux qui y s ont restés.
Article 2 33 — Attroupement a rmé.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Quiconque, f aisant p artie d 'un rassemblement a rmé a u sens des articles 1 15 ( 3) e t 1 17 du p résent C ode, p orte u ne arme o u n e
s'en retire pas à la p remière r équisition de l'autorité c ompétente e st puni d'un e mprisonnement d e trois mois à deux ans.
(2) La p eine est d e deux à c inq a ns d ’emprisonnement p our q uiconque r este dans le r assemblement j usqu’à sa dissolution f orcée.
(3) La p eine est d e cinq à d ix ans d ’emprisonnement p our q uiconque se trouve dans l e r assemblement a u moment où un
ou p lusieurs m embres font usage de l eurs armes.
(4) Les peines du p résent a rticle s ont d oublées s i le rassemblement a lieu p endant la n uit.
(5) L e t ribunal p eut é galement p rononcer les d échéances prévues à l 'article 3 0 d u présent C ode.
Article 234 — C aractère p olitique.
Dans les c as prévus a ux a rticles 231, 2 32 e t 2 33, l a détention e st substituée à l'emprisonnement s i l 'infraction est d e nature p olitique.
Article 235 — C ris s éditieux.
Quiconque aura p oussé des c ris ou des c hants s éditieux d ans un lieu ouvert a u public s era puni d'un e mprisonnement
de huit jours à u n m ois e t d 'une a mende d e 2 000 à 5 0 000 francs o u de l'une d e ces deux peines s eulement.
Article 236 — P illages commis par d es gangs.
(1) Quiconque, e n r éunion ou en groupe e t p ar violence o uverte, pille o u endommage des biens meubles ou i mmeubles s era p uni d'un
emprisonnement d e d ix à v ingt a ns.
(2) La p eine est l a réclusion à p erpétuité s i le crime est c ommis pendant u n état d’urgence o u d’exception.
(3) La p eine est l a mort s i l e crime est commis e n t emps de guerre.
Article 237 — D étention e t p ort d ’armes.
(1) Quiconque, s ans autorisation légalement r equise, f abrique, exporte, importe, p ossède, cède o u vend une a rme ou d es munitions sera p uni
d'un e mprisonnement d e trois m ois à u n an e t d 'une amende de 50 0 00 à 300 0 00 francs o u de l'une d e c es d eux p eines seulement.
(2) Les peines sont d oublées e n cas de port d 'arme hors d u d omicile.
(3) Est considéré comme c omplice q uiconque remet c es a rmes o u munitions à u n tiers s ans s'assurer que ce t iers
est a utorisé à l es détenir.
(4) Dans tous les cas, la confiscation p révue à l'article 3 5 du présent C ode est o bligatoire. En c as d e r écidive, le t ribunal peut o rdonner les
confiscations p révues à l 'article 30 et o rdonner la fermeture de l 'établissement, m ême s'il est u tilisé à d'autres fins.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 238 — P ort dangereux d’une arme.
Quiconque, même muni d'un permis de p ort d'armes, p orte une a rme au s ens d e l 'article 117 du p résent c ode dans un lieu
ouvert a u public e t d ans d es conditions de nature à troubler la tranquillité p ublique ou à i ntimider autrui, s era p uni
d'un e mprisonnement de t rois mois à deux a ns et d'une a mende d e 50 0 00 à 3 00 000 f rancs ou d e l'une d e ces
deux peines seulement.
Article 239 — T roubles de j ouissance.
Quiconque, dans des conditions de nature à troubler l a tranquillité p ublique, p énètre sur un t errain
paisiblement occupé p ar a utrui, même s'il l ui appartient, sera p uni d'un emprisonnement d e quinze j ours à u n an.
Article 2 40 (nouveau). — (Loi n ° 77­3 d u 13 j uillet 1 977) Fausses n ouvelles.
(1) Quiconque a ura p ublié ou propagé, p ar q uelque m oyen q ue ce s oit, une nouvelle s ans pouvoir rapporter la v érité o u
prouver q u'il avait de bonnes r aisons d e croire à la v érité d e l adite n ouvelle s era p uni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un à
cinq a ns et d'une amende d e 20 000 à 1 0 000 000 d e f rancs.
(2) Les p eines sont d oublées l orsque la p ublication ou l a diffusion e st anonyme.
Article 2 41 — I nsulte a ux races et a ux religions.
(1) Quiconque aura commis u ne injure, telle que d éfinie à l'article 152, c ontre u ne race o u u ne religion à l aquelle
appartiennent plusieurs c itoyens ou r ésidents, sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d e six jours à six mois e t d'une
amende de 5 0 00 à 5 00 0 00 f rancs.
(2) Si l 'infraction est commise par v oie de presse ou d e radio, l e maximum de l'amende est porté à 2 0 millions d e f rancs.
(3) Les p eines prévues a ux deux alinéas précédents s ont doublées lorsque l 'infraction est commise d ans le but d e
susciter la haine o u l e m épris parmi les citoyens.
Article 2 42 — D iscrimination.
Quiconque refuse à a utrui l'accès aux lieux ouverts au p ublic ou aux emplois, en r aison de s a race o u de s a
religion, s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un mois à deux ans et d 'une a mende d e 5 0 00 à 5 00 000 f rancs.
Article 2 43 — I vresse p ublique.
(1) Quiconque a ura é té condamné à u ne amende p our ivresse p ublique e t r écidivera d ans l es douze mois,
ainsi q ue tout d ébitant q ui a ura donné à b oire à d es personnes manifestement i vres, sera p uni d 'un
emprisonnement d e quinze j ours à u n mois e t d'une a mende de 2 0 00 à 3 5 0 00 francs.
(2) Le t ribunal peut o rdonner la f ermeture de l'établissement p ar le détaillant c ondamné pour une p ériode p ouvant aller
jusqu'à d eux a ns et o rdonner l a p ublication de sa d écision.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 2 44 — Réitération.
(1) L’article 88(1)(b) s ’applique à u ne c ondamnation s ubséquente pour l’une des i nfractions p révues à l’article p récédent.
(2) L e tribunal p eut é galement prononcer les d échéances prévues à l'article 30 ( 1) et (2) du p résent Code.
(3) L e tribunal p eut é galement ordonner l a fermeture de l 'établissement par l e détaillant c ondamné p our u ne p ériode p ouvant a ller jusqu'à
quatre ans e t o rdonner l a publication d e sa décision.
Article 2 45 — Mendicité.
Quiconque, a yant des m oyens d e subsistance o u pouvant les o btenir p ar l e travail, s ollicite l a charité en quelque l ieu que ce s oit,
sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement de q uinze jours à six mois.
Article 2 46 — Mendicité a ggravée.
Tout m endiant, même i nvalide ou démuni, q ui sollicite la charité dans l 'une d es c irconstances s uivantes s era puni d'un e mprisonnement
de s ix m ois à d eux a ns :
a) E n u tilisant d es insultes, d es menaces o u de l a violence ;
b) Pénétrer sans la permission d e l ’occupant dans un l ogement ou u ne enceinte a ttenante à celui­ci;
(c) En s imulant des blessures o u d es infirmités;
(d) D ans u ne réunion, à moins q u'il ne s'agisse du m ari e t de l a femme, d u p ère o u d e la mère e t de l eurs enfants, de
l'aveugle et d e son guide.
Article 247 (nouveau).­ — V agabondage.
(1) E st v agabond c elui q ui, a yant é té t rouvé dans u n lieu p ublic, ne j ustifie pas d 'un d omicile c ertain ou d e moyens de s ubsistance
et e st p uni d'un e mprisonnement de s ix mois à deux a ns.
(2) L es p eines s usmentionnées s ont doublées :
a) Si le v agabond e st trouvé p ortant des armes ou é quipé d ’un instrument p ropre à commettre une i nfraction ;
(b) S i le v agabond a commis (ou tenté de c ommettre) un acte d e violence c ontre d es p ersonnes.
(3) E n o utre, l es mesures prévues à l'article 42 ( 1°, 2 ° e t 3°) d oivent être imposées.
Article 248 (nouveau).­ — P réparations d angereuses.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Q uiconque, dans le but d e c ommettre un c rime o u u n d élit, porte u n i nstrument propre à f orcer
l'entrée d'un immeuble, sera p uni d 'un emprisonnement d e d ix jours à u n a n.
(2) Cette finalité e st t oujours présumée lorsque ces a ctes sont commis la n uit.
Article 2 49 — Jeux e t loteries.
(1) Q uiconque, sans a utorisation légalement r equise, o ffre au p ublic, e n v ue d e f aire espérer un
gain en n ature ou en espèces, s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement de d eux mois à un a n e t
d'une a mende de 50 0 00 à 3 millions d e f rancs ou d e l 'une d e c es d eux peines seulement :
(a) T ous l es p aris ou l oteries;
(b) T out a utre jeu dans l equel l a c hance prédomine sur l ’adresse ;
(2) Une o ffre faite uniquement à d es personnes qui sont m embres du m ême cercle n ’est p as publique.
(3) Le t ribunal peut également ordonner l a d échéance de l'article 3 0 ainsi q ue la
fermeture d e l'établissement m ême s 'il est utilisé à d 'autres fins.
(4) L e t ribunal p rononce non seulement l a c onfiscation prévue à l'article 3 5 du p résent Code mais é galement
celle d es meubles et effets personnels aménagés ou décorés en v ue d 'attirer l a clientèle a insi q ue d es
fonds et e ffets, m eubles ou immeubles d estinés à récompenser les gagnants.
Article 250 — P rêteurs s ur g ages.
Toute personne qui :
a) Exploite, s ans l’autorisation q ui p eut être requise, une m aison de p rêt sur
gage o u de gage;
(b) Ayant c ette autorisation ne tient p as l es r egistres qui peuvent ê tre prescrits.
Article 2 51 — S orcellerie.
Quiconque se l ivre à des pratiques d e s orcellerie, d e m agie ou de divination de nature à t roubler l 'ordre o u la t ranquillité publics
ou à porter atteinte à la personne, aux biens ou à la fortune d 'autrui, m ême sous f orme de rémunération, sera puni
d'un e mprisonnement d e d eux à dix a ns et d 'une amende de 5 0 00 à 100 000 f rancs.
CHAPITRE I II
DOMMAGES À L’ÉCONOMIE P UBLIQUE.
Article 252 — Faux p oids e t mesures.
Tout commerçant ou a rtisan q ui :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
conserve dans l e l ieu d e s on c ommerce ou d e s on travail des poids ou des mesures faux o u
d'autres a ppareils inexacts u tilisés p our peser ou mesurer ses m archandises.
Article 253 — ( Loi n ° 9 0­061 du 1 9 d écembre 1 990) C hèque s ans p rovision.
(1) T oute p ersonne qui :
a) Émet un c hèque s ur un c ompte bancaire ou postal, m ême é tranger, sans p rovision p réalable
et d isponible o u s ans provision suffisante ;
b) Après l'émission, m ême à l'étranger, r etire tout ou partie de la p rovision o u interdit au tiré d e payer.
Article 254 — L iberté des e nchères.
Quiconque, par v iolences o u menaces, p ar d ons ou p romesses o u p ar toute manœuvre, t rouble la l iberté ou e ntrave
la s incérité d es e nchères o u des s oumissions, sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement d 'un à s ix m ois e t d'une a mende de 5 0
000 à 1 m illion d e francs.
Article 255 — E ntrave à la l iberté d u t ravail.
Quiconque, par v iolences, m enaces o u m anœuvres f rauduleuses, a ura a mené ou m aintenu u ne cessation concertée
du t ravail p our f orcer u ne augmentation o u u ne d iminution de s alaire o u p our p orter a tteinte a u l ibre e xercice d u t ravail
ou d e l 'industrie, sera puni d'un e mprisonnement de q uinze j ours à t rois a ns et d'une a mende de 5 0 00 à 7 00 000 francs ou
de l 'une d e c es d eux p eines s eulement.
Article 256 — P ression s ur les prix.
(1) Q uiconque, par u n m oyen f rauduleux quelconque, aura artificiellement a ugmenté o u diminué l e p rix d e
marchandises o u d 'effets p ublics ou p rivés, s era p uni d'un e mprisonnement d e deux m ois à d eux a ns et d'une
amende d e 4 00 000 à 20 m illions de f rancs.
(2) L a p eine est doublée si l es marchandises sont d es denrées alimentaires o u relèvent d es textes relatifs aux
emballages.
(3) L e t ribunal p eut également p rononcer l es déchéances d e l'article 30 (1) et (2) et ordonner la p ublication d e
sa décision.
Article 257 — D estruction d es aliments.
Quiconque, dans le but d'influer s ur les prix d es d enrées alimentaires destinées à l'homme
ou à l'animal, les aura fait périr, c orrompre ou d isparaître, sera p uni d'un emprisonnement
d'un à cinq ans et d'une amende d e 5 0 0 00 à 1 million de francs.
CHAPITRE IV
DOMMAGES À L A S ANTÉ P UBLIQUE.
Article 258 — A ltération des d enrées a limentaires.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Quiconque a ura falsifié d es d enrées a limentaires d estinées à l 'alimentation humaine o u a nimale, d es boissons ou d es
substances m édicinales destinées à la v ente, o u a ura détenu des produits destinés ou p ropres u niquement à effectuer u ne telle f alsification, s era
puni d 'un e mprisonnement de t rois m ois à t rois a ns e t d'une a mende d e 5 0 00 à 5 00 000 francs.
(2) Quiconque détient e n vue de la vente des denrées alimentaires, b oissons ou médicaments
falsifiés, altérés o u nuisibles à la santé h umaine s era puni d e la m ême peine.
(3) L es dispositions d u p résent article ne s ’appliquent p as aux f ruits e t l égumes frais fermentés ou a variés.
(4) L es aliments, b oissons et médicaments, s 'ils appartiennent e ncore au c ondamné, s ont c onfisqués. S 'ils n e s ont pas utilisés p ar
l'Administration, l eur d estruction est à la c harge du c ondamné.
(5) L e tribunal p eut o rdonner la p ublication d e s a décision d ans l es conditions p révues à l 'article 3 3 d u p résent C ode.
Article 259 — Faux c ertificat m édical.
(1) T out médecin, c hirurgien, i nfirmier, dentiste o u s age­femme qui, pour l e bien ou l e m al d'autrui, a ura faussement attesté ou
dissimulé l'existence d 'une m aladie ou d 'une i nfirmité o u f aussement a ttesté l'existence ou l e r ésultat d'une vaccination ou f ourni de f aux
renseignements s ur l 'origine d'une m aladie, la d urée d'une i ncapacité ou l a cause d 'un d écès, s era p uni d'un e mprisonnement de d eux m ois à
trois a ns et d'une amende d e 5 000 à 100 0 00 f rancs.
(2) L a p eine est de d eux à dix a ns d’emprisonnement en cas d e corruption.
(3) L e tribunal p eut p rononcer les c onfiscations é numérées à l 'article 3 0 d u p résent C ode.
Article 260 — Maladies c ontagieuses.
(1) Q uiconque, p ar sa conduite, facilite l a transmission d'une maladie contagieuse e t dangereuse sera
puni d 'un e mprisonnement d e t rois m ois à trois a ns.
(2) S i la contagion facilitée est dangereuse p our la v ie d es a nimaux n ormalement destinés à l a c onsommation h umaine, l 'emprisonnement
est d 'un m ois à un a n.
Article 261 — Pollution.
Toute p ersonne q ui, p ar s on a ctivité :
(a) Pollue l 'eau p otable q ui p eut ê tre u tilisée p ar d'autres; ou
(b) P ollue l’atmosphère au p oint d e l a rendre nocive pour la s anté publique.
Article 262 — Résiliation d u contrat de t ravail.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Q uiconque r ompt un contrat d e travail ou de fourniture lorsque la c onséquence p révisible
de c ette rupture est soit u n d anger g rave p our l a s anté p ublique ou pour c elle des patients
hospitalisés, s oit d es atteintes graves à l 'intégrité p hysique, soit une d étérioration g rave de
biens d e t oute n ature, soit u ne p rivation d 'électricité ou d'eau a u p réjudice de plusieurs
personnes, s era puni d'un e mprisonnement d 'un à six m ois.
(2) Le p résent a rticle ne s ’applique p as à q uiconque donne un préavis minimum d e sept jours.
CHAPITRE V
ATTAQUES À L A MORALE P UBLIQUE.
Article 263 — O utrage a ux bonnes m œurs.
Quiconque a ura p ubliquement outragé l es b onnes m œurs s era p uni d 'un e mprisonnement
de q uinze j ours à deux ans et d 'une amende de 1 0 0 00 à 100 0 00 f rancs o u d e l 'une d e c es deux
peines s eulement.
Article 264 — O utrage a ux bonnes m œurs.
Les peines prévues à l 'article précédent s eront appliquées à q uiconque :
(a) P rononce p ubliquement d es c hansons, d es cris o u d es discours contraires au b ien
morale; o u
b) A ttire l ’attention d u p ublic s ur une o ccasion d e d ébauche.
Article 2 65 — Publications o bscènes.
(1) Q uiconque :
(a) Fabrique, détient, i mporte, t ransporte ou e xporte à d es fins c ommerciales; o u
b) Affiche o u distribue, m ême gratuitement e t même non p ubliquement, t out
écrit, d essin o u objet t endant à corrompre les b onnes m œurs.
(2) Le tribunal p eut également ordonner l a fermeture, p our u ne durée pouvant aller jusqu'à u n
an, d e l'établissement où l e c ondamné p roduit ou d étient l esdits é crits, dessins ou o bjets.
Article 2 66 — P ublications a mbiguës.
(1) Q uiconque a ura fait état, a utrement q u'en p ubliant le jugement, d 'une p rocédure en
déclaration d e p aternité, e n d ivorce, en s éparation de c orps o u e n a vortement sera puni d 'une
amende d e 20 000 à 2 millions de f rancs.
(2) Quiconque, sans l 'autorisation écrite du m inistère public, a ura donné p ublicité par quelque m oyen que c e soit au suicide d e
mineurs de d ix­huit ans r évolus s era p uni d 'une a mende d e 2 0 000 à 2 m illions de f rancs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
En c as de récidive, une peine d 'emprisonnement de d eux mois à d eux a ns peut é galement ê tre p rononcée.
(3) Q uiconque c ontrevient aux dispositions d e l 'article 23 ( 3) d u p résent C ode relatives aux e xécutions capitales sera
puni d 'une amende d e 1 0 0 00 à 1 m illion d e f rancs.
(4) Q uiconque, s auf r équisition écrite d u m agistrat chargé d e l 'instruction, r eproduit par i mage o u s ous quelque f orme q ue c e soit
tout ou partie d es circonstances d es infractions avec violence e t de t outes celles c ommises c ontre l es enfants ou c ontre l es bonnes
mœurs, s era p uni d 'une a mende d e 2 0 0 00 à 200 000 francs.
Article 267 — A pologie de c ertains crimes e t d élits.
Quiconque aura publiquement f ait l 'apologie d es crimes d'assassinat, d e p illage, d'incendie, d e d estruction, de v ol, a insi que d es crimes
ou délits c ontre l a sûreté d e l 'Etat, s era p uni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un à c inq ans et d 'une amende de 1 0 0 00 à 2 0 m illions
de francs, ou de l'une d e c es d eux p eines seulement.
Article 268 — M altraitance a nimale.
(1) Q uiconque, s ans n écessité, maltraite u n a nimal domestique ou a pprivoisé o u u n a nimal vivant e n c aptivité, s era p uni d'un
emprisonnement de q uinze j ours à trois m ois e t d'une amende d e 5 000 à 20 0 00 f rancs ou d e l 'une d e c es deux p eines
seulement.
(2) L e tribunal p eut également priver l a personne c ondamnée de l a propriété de l ’animal.
(3) L e tribunal peut également ordonner la destruction d e l ’animal lorsque s on é tat j ustifie c ette mesure.
CHAPITRE V I
ATTAQUES CONTRE LES SECTES.
Article 269 — L iberté de c onscience.
Quiconque, p ar l a f orce o u l a menace, c ontraint ou e mpêche l'exercice d'un culte qui n'implique p as la commission d 'un délit, s era
puni d 'un e mprisonnement d 'un m ois à un a n e t d'une a mende d e 5 0 00 à 1 000 l ivres s terling.
50 000 f rancs.
Article 270 — I nfraction c ontre u n m inistre d u culte.
Quiconque frappe o u i nsulte p ubliquement un m inistre du culte dans l'exercice d e s on ministère sera p uni d'un emprisonnement
d'un m ois à t rois a ns.
Article 271 — E ntrave à l’exercice d ’un m inistère.
Quiconque e mpêche le ministre du c ulte d 'exercer s on m inistère par violence ou menaces sera p uni d e la p eine
prévue à l'article précédent.
Article 272 — O bstruction au c ulte.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Quiconque, par des t roubles ou d es d ésordres, empêche, r etarde ou interrompt l'exercice d 'un c ulte dans l es
lieux o ù i l est h abituellement c élébré, sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d e quinze jours à u n an et d 'une amende
de 5 0 00 à 1 00 0 00 francs ou de l 'une d e ces deux p eines s eulement.
Article 2 73 — Obstruction a ux funérailles.
Toute personne qui :
(a) p erturbe u ne cérémonie o u un c ortège f unèbre; ou
(b) Endommage les m onuments f unéraires; ou
(c) N e remplit pas son d evoir d’enterrer ou d’incinérer l e c orps.
Article 2 74 — Violation des t ombeaux et d es c adavres.
(1) Q uiconque :
(a) Violation d e tombes o u de sépultures; o u
(b) Profane t out ou p artie d’un cadavre h umain, qu’il s oit enterré ou non.
(2) Quiconque, dans l 'intérêt de la science, d ispose d'un cadavre c onformément a ux règlements e n v igueur
n'est p as passible d es p eines ci­dessus mentionnées.
TITRE I II
CRIMES ET D ÉLITS C ONTRE L ES INDIVIDUS.
CHAPITRE I
ATTEINTES À L’INTÉGRITÉ C ORPORELLE.
Section I
HOMICIDE E T B LESSURES VOLONTAIRES.
Article 2 75 — Meurtre.
Quiconque c ause l a mort d ’autrui s era puni d e l a réclusion à p erpétuité.
Article 2 76 — Meurtre.
(1) M eurtre c ommis soit :
(a) Avec préméditation;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
b) Par e mpoisonnement ;
c) De préparer, d e f aciliter ou d ’exécuter un c rime ou u n d élit, o u d e f avoriser l ’évasion ou d ’assurer l ’impunité
des a uteurs ou c omplices d e c e crime ou d e c e d élit.
(2) Il y a préméditation même s i l ’identité de l a v ictime n ’est pas déterminée, e t même si l’auteur s ubordonne son
projet à la r éalisation d’une condition q uelconque.
Article 277 — B lessures graves.
Quiconque a ura f ait p erdre d éfinitivement à a utrui l 'usage d e t out ou partie d 'un membre, d'un organe o u d 'un
sens sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement d e d ix à vingt ans.
Section II
VIOLENCE E T A GRESSIONS V OLONTAIRES.
Article 278 — C oups m ortels.
(1) Q uiconque, p ar violence ou v oies d e fait, aura i nvolontairement c ausé l a mort d'autrui s era puni d 'un emprisonnement
de six à vingt a ns.
(2) La p eine e st la r éclusion c riminelle à p erpétuité si les v iolences ou voies de fait sont commises à l 'occasion de l'exercice d e
la sorcellerie, d e l a m agie o u d e la d ivination.
Article 279 — V oies de f ait c ausant des blessures graves.
(1) Q uiconque, p ar violences ou v oies d e f ait, c ause involontairement à autrui d es blessures prévues à l'article 2 77 sera puni
d'un e mprisonnement d e c inq à dix ans et, s 'il y a lieu, d 'une a mende d e 5 000 à 500 000 francs.
(2) L 'emprisonnement e st d e s ix à q uinze ans lorsqu'il e st f ait u sage d'une a rme o u d'une s ubstance explosive,
corrosive o u toxique o u d 'un p oison ou d 'un p rocédé de sorcellerie, d e m agie o u de d ivination.
Article 280 — B lessures simples.
Quiconque, p ar violences ou v oies d e f ait, a ura c ausé à autrui, m ême involontairement, une maladie ou u ne incapacité de
travail p endant plus de t rente jours, sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement d e s ix m ois à cinq ans et d'une a mende d e 5 000 à
200 000 francs o u d e l 'une de c es deux peines seulement.
Article 281 — B lessures légères.
Quiconque, p ar violences o u v oies d e f ait, aura c ausé à autrui, m ême involontairement, une maladie ou u ne incapacité de
travail d 'une d urée supérieure à h uit j ours et p ouvant aller jusqu'à t rente j ours, sera puni d'un emprisonnement d e s ix j ours
à deux a ns e t d'une amende de 5 0 00 à 5 0 0 00 f rancs o u d e l 'une d e c es deux p eines seulement.
Article 2 82 — Abandon d ’une personne i ncapable.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Quiconque déplace et a bandonne une p ersonne incapable d e se protéger e n raison de son é tat physique ou mental s era puni d 'un
emprisonnement d 'un à t rois ans et d 'une amende d e 5 000 à 25 000 f rancs.
(2) L a p eine d 'emprisonnement e st d e cinq à d ix ans si l a victime e st abandonnée d ans u n l ieu solitaire.
(3) L a p eine e st l'emprisonnement d e dix à vingt a ns lorsque le coupable e st u n a scendant ou t oute a utre personne a yant autorité
sur l 'incapable ou en ayant la g arde légale o u de fait.
(4) D ans t ous l es cas, l e t ribunal peut prononcer l es d échéances d e l 'article 3 0 d u p résent C ode ainsi que l a déchéance d e
l'autorité p arentale e t p our l a m ême durée.
Article 283 — D éfaut de prêter a ssistance.
Quiconque omet de porter à une p ersonne en danger de m ort ou d e b lessure grave le secours qu'il a urait p u l ui porter s oit p ar son f ait
personnel, soit e n p ortant s ecours sans r isque pour l ui­même ou p our l es tiers, s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un mois à
trois a ns et d 'une amende de 20 000 à 1 million d e francs, ou d e l 'une de c es deux p eines s eulement.
Section III
DISPOSITIONS COMMUNES.
Article 284 — Erreur concernant la v ictime.
Aux fins d es articles 275 à 281 i nclusivement, l'homicide, l a violence et l es voies de f ait sont volontaires même si l 'intention
du c oupable est de n uire à autrui.
Article 285 — A ssimilation à la v iolence.
Pour l'application du présent Code, s ont c onsidérés c omme violences et v oies de f ait :
a) L’administration d e toute substance n ocive pour l a santé;
b) L ’abandon prévu à l ’article 2 82 ;
c) P rivation, de la p art d e la p ersonne q ui a la garde l égale o u d e f ait, d e n ourriture ou d e s oins, a u p oint de c ompromettre
la santé d 'une personne qui ne peut ni é chapper à c ette garde n i se protéger.
Article 286 — I nterventions m édicales.
Les articles 277 à 281 i nclus n e s'appliquent p as aux actes m édicaux p osés par toute p ersonne d ûment a utorisée l orsqu'ils sont
accomplis avec l e consentement d u patient ou de la p ersonne qui e n a l a garde.
Toutefois, si le patient e st i ncapable de consentir, l a p ersonne ayant l a garde d u p atient ou s on c onjoint d oit donner s on
consentement, à moins q u’il soit impossible de communiquer a vec eux s ans risque pour l e patient.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 2 87 — I ntérêt d e la v ictime.
Il n’y a pas d’infraction l orsque les b lessures ou l es violences sont justifiées par l a nécessité immédiate d ’empêcher que la victime subisse un
préjudice p lus g rave.
Article 2 88 — A ctivités sportives.
Les articles 278 à 281 inclus n e s 'appliquent pas aux actes a ccomplis au cours d 'une a ctivité sportive, à c ondition q ue l'auteur ait
respecté l es règles d e ce sport.
Section IV
HOMICIDE ET B LESSURES N ON I NTENTIONNELLES.
Article 2 89 — H omicide et blessures i nvolontaires.
(1) Quiconque, par maladresse, négligence, imprudence o u i nobservation d es r èglements, aura c ausé l a mort o u des b lessures, l a
maladie ou l'incapacité de travail p révues aux articles 277 et 280 s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d e t rois mois à c inq
ans et d'une a mende de 10 000 à 5 00 0 00 francs ou d e l 'une d e ces deux peines seulement.
(2) La peine est un e mprisonnement d e s ix à v ingt a ns si l'une des i nfractions prévues a ux a rticles 2 77, 228 (2) ( a) et ( b) c ause d es b lessures,
des m aladies ou une incapacité d e travail c omme p révu aux a rticles 2 77 et 280.
(3) La peine est la réclusion à p erpétuité lorsque l'une des infractions p révues a ux a rticles 2 27, 228 (2) a ) et b ) cause l a mort d'une autre
personne.
(4) S i l'homicide o u l es blessures o nt été causés p ar le conducteur d 'un véhicule q ui nécessite u n permis p our
être conduit, l e t ribunal peut o rdonner le retrait d u p ermis de c onduire o u l 'interdiction d'en obtenir un pour une p ériode
maximale de trois ans e t, en cas de r écidive, pour u ne période m aximale de d ix ans.
Article 2 90 — C onducteurs de véhicules.
(1) Les peines p révues à l 'article 2 89 (1) s ont doublées s i l 'infraction est commise par le conducteur de tout
véhicule:
a) Qui conduit en état d 'ivresse ou sous l'influence d e l'alcool; o u
(b) Qui conduit sans le p ermis requis; ou
(c) Q ui, pour é chapper à l a r esponsabilité q u’il encourt, prend la fuite.
(2) L a peine est u n e mprisonnement de s ix mois à quatre a ns et une a mende d e 10 0 00 à 1 00 0 00 f rancs s i l e conducteur d 'un
véhicule cause, dans les c irconstances v isées à l 'alinéa p récédent, d es blessures telles que p révues à l 'article 2 81.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(3) Dans t ous l es c as prévus a ux d eux alinéas précédents, l e tribunal p eut p rononcer le retrait d u permis de
conduire o u l 'interdiction de l 'obtenir pour une d urée m aximale d e c inq a ns. En cas de r écidive, le retrait o u
l'interdiction p eut ê tre à vie.
(4) Sauf d ans l e c as prévu à l'alinéa ( 1) c ) c i­dessus, t out c onducteur de véhicule q ui, venant d e provoquer u n a ccident,
prend l a f uite p our é chapper à s a responsabilité e st p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d'un m ois à un a n et d'une
amende d e 2 0 000 à 200 000 francs o u d e l 'une de c es deux p eines s eulement. L e tribunal p eut p rononcer le
retrait du p ermis de c onduire o u l 'interdiction de l 'obtenir p our u ne d urée m aximale d e deux a ns.
CHAPITRE II
ATTAQUES CONTRE LA L IBERTÉ ET L A P AIX DES P EUPLES.
Section I
ATTAQUES À LA LIBERTÉ.
Article 291 — S aisie e t s équestre.
(1) Quiconque, d e q uelque manière q ue c e s oit, p rive autrui de sa l iberté sera p uni d'un e mprisonnement de cinq à d ix
ans e t d'une a mende d e 2 0 0 00 à 1 million d e f rancs.
(2) L a peine est u n e mprisonnement de d ix à v ingt ans d ans l'un des c as suivants :
a) Si la privation de liberté d ure plus d’un mois ;
b) S i elle s’accompagne de v iolences physiques o u morales ;
(c) Si l'arrestation est effectuée soit sur l a b ase d 'un faux ordre d e l'autorité p ublique, soit
avec l e p ort i llégal de l 'uniforme, s oit s ous u ne f ausse q ualité.
Article 2 92 — T ravail forcé.
Quiconque, p our s atisfaire s on i ntérêt p ersonnel, i mpose à autrui un travail ou un s ervice p our l equel i l ne
s'est p as o ffert d e s on p lein g ré, s era p uni d'un e mprisonnement d'un à cinq a ns e t d'une a mende de 1 0
000 à 500 0 00 f rancs o u d e l'une d e c es deux peines seulement.
Article 293 — E sclavage.
(1) Quiconque :
(a) Réduit ou m aintient u ne personne en e sclavage; ou
(b) Se livre, même o ccasionnellement, à l a traite d es p ersonnes.
(2) Quiconque d onne ou r eçoit u n gage d 'une personne est puni d 'un e mprisonnement d'un à cinq a ns e t d'une a mende
de 1 0 000 à 1 000 000 f rancs. L e tribunal p eut é galement p rononcer l es déchéances p révues à l 'article 3 0 d u
présent c ode.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 2 94 ( nouveau).­ — P roxénétisme.
(1) Q uiconque p rovoque, a ide ou f acilite l a p rostitution d 'autrui ou qui p artage m ême occasionnellement le produit d e la prostitution
d'autrui ou reçoit des s ubsides d'une p ersonne s e livrant à la prostitution sera puni d'un emprisonnement de six mois à c inq ans et d 'une
amende d e 20 000 à 1 0 00 000 de f rancs.
(2) L a personne qui, v ivant a vec une personne s e l ivrant à la prostitution, n e peut prouver q u'elle dispose de ressources
suffisantes p our s ubvenir seule à s es besoins e st présumée r ecevoir des subventions.
(3) L es p eines sont d oublées si :
a) L 'infraction e st accompagnée d e c ontrainte o u de fraude ou si l'auteur est a rmé; o u s'il est p ropriétaire, gérant ou
employé d 'un établissement où l a p rostitution e st p ratiquée
(b) S i l'infraction a é té commise c ontre u ne personne âgée d e moins d e vingt e t u n ans
(c) Si l’auteur e st le p ère o u l a m ère, le t uteur ou le tuteur c outumier.
(4) D ans l es c as visés a u p aragraphe 3, l es dispositions d e l 'article 4 8 doivent être a ppliquées.
(5) L e tribunal p eut p rononcer l es déchéances de l 'article 3 0 du présent c ode e t p river l e condamné, p our la même durée, de toute
tutelle ou curatelle ; i l peut également l ui interdire, p our l a m ême d urée, la garde, même coutumière, de tout mineur d e vingt e t
un ans.
années.
(6) L e tribunal o rdonne également, d ans l e c as p révu au p aragraphe 3 , a ), la fermeture d e l'établissement, m ême
s'il e st u tilisé à d 'autres f ins.
(7) A ux f ins d u présent article, une prostituée n ’est pas c onsidérée c omme complice.
Section I I
INFRACTIONS S EXUELLES.
Article 2 95 — A tteinte p rivée à l a p udeur.
(1) Q uiconque, m ême d ans un l ieu privé, commet un outrage à la pudeur p ublique en p résence d'une p ersonne n on c onsentante
de l 'un o u l 'autre sexe sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement de q uinze j ours à deux a ns et d'une a mende d e 1 0 0 00 à 1 00 0 00 f rancs o u d 'une d e c es peines s eulement.
deux p énalités seulement.
(2) L es peines sont doublées si l 'injure e st accompagnée d e violence.
Article 2 96 — V iol.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Quiconque, au moyen de v iolences physiques ou m orales, force u ne femme, même p ubère, à a voir des
relations sexuelles avec l ui, sera p uni d'un emprisonnement de c inq à d ix a ns.
Article 297 — M ariage subséquent.
Le mariage l ibrement c onsenti d e l a victime pubère a u moment d es faits avec l a personne c oupable d 'une
infraction visée aux d eux articles p récédents produit les e ffets p révus à l'article 7 3, alinéas 1 à 4, d u
présent Code.
Article 298 — P eines aggravées.
Les p eines p révues a ux articles 2 94, 2 95 e t 296 s ont doublées lorsque le coupable est :
a) U ne personne a yant autorité sur l a v ictime ou a yant l a garde légale o u c outumière d e l a
victime ;
(b) Un fonctionnaire o u u n m inistre du c ulte;
(c) Une p ersonne a ssistée par u ne ou p lusieurs autres personnes.
Section III
ATTAQUES C ONTRE L A P AIX DES P OPULATIONS.
Article 299 — V iolation d u d omicile.
(1) Quiconque pénètre ou s e maintient contre l e gré d'autrui d ans le domicile d'autrui s era p uni d'un
emprisonnement de d ix jours à u n a n e t d 'une a mende de 5 0 00 à 5 0 0 00 f rancs ou d e l 'une d e c es
deux p eines s eulement.
(2) Les p eines sont d oublées si l'infraction e st commise d e nuit o u au moyen d e menaces, d e v iolences ou de voies d e fait.
(3) Les p oursuites ne p euvent être e ngagées que s ur p lainte de l a victime.
Article 300 — Violation d e l a correspondance.
(1) Quiconque a ura s upprimé ou o uvert la correspondance d'autrui s ans l 'autorisation d u d estinataire sera p uni
d'un emprisonnement de q uinze j ours à u n a n et d'une a mende de 5 0 00 à 1 00 0 00 f rancs ou d e l 'une d e
ces deux p eines s eulement.
(2) Le présent article n e s ’applique pas a ux conjoints ni aux p arents, tuteurs ou t uteurs coutumiers
à l ’égard des e nfants de m oins de 2 1 a ns q ui ne sont pas é mancipés.
Article 301 — Menaces simples.
Quiconque, par u n é crit ou u ne i mage, m enace une a utre personne de v iolences ou d e v oies d e f ait, ou
de destruction d e b iens, o u d e v iolation de d omicile, sera p uni d'un emprisonnement de d ix j ours à t rois a ns
et d'une a mende d e 5 0 00 à 1 50 0 00 f rancs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 3 02 — M enaces sous conditions.
(1) Quiconque, a vec ordre o u condition, menace a utrui, même i mplicitement, de v iolences ou d e v oies de f ait, sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement
de d ix jours à s ix mois e t d'une a mende d e 5 000 à 2 5 000 f rancs.
(2) Si l a violence o u l'agression constitue une i nfraction passible d e l a p eine de m ort ou d e l a r éclusion à perpétuité, la p eine est :
a) D e s ix m ois à t rois ans d 'emprisonnement e t d 'une amende d e 5 000 à 70 000 francs e n cas d e menaces v erbales
b) De deux à c inq ans d 'emprisonnement e t d'une a mende d e 1 0 0 00 à 250 000 f rancs e n c as de m enaces par é crit o u p ar i mage ;
dans c e cas, le tribunal peut également p rononcer les d échéances de l 'article 30 d u p résent a rticle.
Code.
Article 3 03 — C hantage.
(1) Quiconque, a vec ordre o u conditions, m enace a utrui d 'une i mputation o u d 'une r évélation diffamatoire, sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement d 'un à
cinq ans e t d'une amende de 200 0 00 à 2 0 00 0 00 de francs.
(2) La p eine est doublée s 'il s 'agit d e l'imputation d 'un c rime.
(3) Le t ribunal peut é galement p rononcer l es d échéances prévues à l'article 3 0 d u p résent C ode.
Article 3 04 — D énonciation c alomnieuse.
(1) Quiconque f ait à u ne a utorité p ublique o u privée u ne f ausse d énonciation p ouvant e ntraîner des s anctions pénales o u d isciplinaires
sera puni d'un emprisonnement d e six m ois à cinq a ns e t d'une a mende d e 1 0 0 00 à 1 000 000 d e f rancs, à moins qu'il n e p rouve q u'il a vait
de b onnes r aisons d e croire a ux faits dénoncés.
(2) L'emprisonnement est d e deux à cinq a ns l orsque l a dénonciation e st a nonyme.
(3) Si, à l a suite d u s ignalement, d es p oursuites p énales s ont e ngagées devant l e t ribunal d e p remière i nstance en r elation a vec l'acte signalé,
les poursuites r elatives à l 'accusation de signalement sont suspendues jusqu'à ce q u'une d écision définitive soit r endue.
(4) Le t ribunal peut o rdonner la publication du jugement.
Article 3 05 — ( Loi n ° 93/013 du 22 décembre 1993) D iffamation.
(1) Quiconque, p ar l 'un des m oyens p révus à l'article 152, p orte atteinte à l'honneur o u à la r éputation d'une p ersonne en l ui
attribuant directement o u indirectement des f aits dont elle n e p eut r apporter la p reuve, s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement d e s ix j ours à six m ois
et d'une a mende de 5 0 00 à 2 m illions d e francs ou de l'une d e ces deux peines s eulement.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) Ces peines s 'appliquent é galement a ux a uteurs d e d iffamation c ommise p ar voie d e presse écrite, de radio
ou d e t élévision, s ans p réjudice d u droit de réponse et du devoir de rectification.
(3) La v érité d e l ’imputation peut t oujours être p rouvée s auf :
a) L orsqu'il s 'agit de la v ie privée de l a v ictime; ou
(b) Lorsqu'il s e r éfère à u n fait remontant à plus d e dix ans; ou
c) L orsqu'il s'agit d'un f ait constituant une i nfraction amnistiée o u d'un f ait ayant f ait l'objet d'une c ondamnation q ui a p ar ailleurs
été e ffacée.
(4) L'action p ublique n e p eut être e ngagée que s ur plainte d e la v ictime o u de son représentant l égal o u coutumier, mais j usqu'à
condamnation d éfinitive, le r etrait d e l a p lainte arrête l 'exercice de l'action p ublique.
(5) Le d élai de p rescription d e l'action publique e st de q uatre m ois à c ompter de la commission d e l'infraction ou du dernier acte
de p oursuite ou d 'instruction.
(6) Le p résent a rticle s'applique à l a diffamation dirigée contre l a m émoire d 'une p ersonne d écédée l orsque l 'auteur d e la
diffamation a vait l'intention d e porter atteinte à l 'honneur o u à l a r éputation des h éritiers vivants, des époux o u des
légataires u niversels.
(7) Les p eines s ont r éduites d e moitié si l a d iffamation n'est pas p ublique.
(8) Les p eines s ont d oublées l orsque la d iffamation est anonyme.
Article 306 — Exceptions à la d iffamation.
Ne c onstituent pas une i nfraction :
1. L es d iscours prononcés d ans les assemblées l égislatives e t les r apports ou tout a utre d ocument imprimé sur ordre de
l'une d e c es a ssemblées ;
2. L es procès­verbaux des s éances p ubliques de ces a ssemblées sont d ressés de bonne f oi ;
3. L es d ébats judiciaires, les discours p rononcés o u les é crits p roduits d evant l es tribunaux ;
4. U n c ompte rendu fidèle et fidèle de c es d ébats e t discours, à l ’exception d es p oursuites en diffamation ;
5. L a p ublication d es décisions d e j ustice, y c ompris celles rendues e n matière d e diffamation ;
6. L e p rocès­verbal établi de b onne f oi p ar une personne d ûment mandatée pour mener u ne enquête e t dans le c adre d e
cette e nquête ;
7. L 'imputation faite de b onne f oi par u n s upérieur h iérarchique sur son subordonné ;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
8. Les r enseignements d onnés de b onne f oi sur une p ersonne à un tiers qui a un intérêt p ersonnel
ou o fficiel à la c onnaître o u q ui a le p ouvoir d e remédier à une i njustice a lléguée ;
9. Critique d ’une œ uvre, d ’un s pectacle o u de toute o pinion exprimée p ubliquement, à condition
que cette critique ne r eflète p as d’animosité personnelle ;
10. T ravail h istorique r éalisé de b onne f oi.
Article 3 07 — Blessures.
(1) Q uiconque, dans l es conditions d e p ublicité p révues à l'article 152 d u présent c ode et sans a voir été
provoqué, a ura employé c ontre u ne personne une e xpression injurieuse, un geste, un terme de mépris
ou u ne invective q ui ne c ontient l'imputation d'aucun f ait, sera p uni d'un emprisonnement de cinq j ours à trois
mois et d'une amende d e 5 000 à 100 000 francs ou de l'une de ces d eux peines seulement.
(2) L 'action publique n e p eut être e ngagée q ue sur plainte d e la v ictime ou de son représentant légal o u
coutumier, mais j usqu'à c ondamnation d éfinitive, l e r etrait d e la p lainte arrête l 'exercice d e l'action
publique.
(3) L e d élai d e prescription d e l 'action publique est d e quatre mois à compter de la c ommission d e l'infraction
ou d u d ernier a cte d e p oursuite o u d 'instruction.
(4) L e p résent a rticle s 'applique aux insultes à la mémoire d'une p ersonne décédée d ans les m êmes
conditions que celles prévues à l'article 305 ( 5).
Article 3 08 — Extorsion d 'un a cte, d 'une signature, d 'un chèque e n blanc.
(1) Q uiconque, par v iolence, contrainte o u f raude, aura extorqué la s ignature o u la d élivrance d'un acte
quelconque c ontenant u ne o bligation, une disposition o u une d écharge ou de nature à compromettre l a
personne o u l a f ortune d u s ignataire sera puni d'un emprisonnement d e cinq à dix a ns et d'une
amende d e 1 0 000 à 500 0 00 francs.
(2) Q uiconque, par le m ême m oyen, obtient l a d élivrance d'un c hèque en blanc e t le c omplète avec l 'un d es documents
prévue à l 'alinéa précédent sera punie d es mêmes peines.
CHAPITRE III
ATTAQUES À LA C ONFIANCE DES GENS.
Article 3 09 — Abus de c arte blanche.
Quiconque aura fait u n u sage abusif d'un c hèque e n blanc q ui lui a été confié pour y i nscrire
frauduleusement s oit une obligation, une disposition o u une d écharge, s oit u ne m ention d e nature à compromettre
la p ersonne o u l a f ortune d u s ignataire, sera puni d 'un emprisonnement d 'un à cinq a ns et d'une a mende
de 5 0 00 à 5 00 000 francs o u d e l 'une de c es deux p eines seulement.
Article 3 10 — Secret professionnel.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Q uiconque r évèle, s ans l 'autorisation d e celui à qui i l appartient, un fait c onfidentiel q u'il n 'a connu
ou qui n e l ui a été c onfié qu'en raison d e sa profession o u de s es f onctions, sera puni d'un
emprisonnement de t rois m ois à trois a ns et d 'une amende d e 20 0 00 à 100 000 francs.
(2) Le p aragraphe précédent n e s 'applique pas aux déclarations f aites a ux autorités j udiciaires ou p olicières concernant d es faits
susceptibles d e c onstituer un crime ou u n délit, n i a ux réponses j udiciaires à q uelque demande que c e soit.
(3) Le p aragraphe 2 ne s’applique pas :
a) Au médecin et au c hirurgien qui sont t oujours t enus a u s ecret p rofessionnel, s auf dans l es limites d'une r équisition légale o u
d'une c ommission d'expertise ;
(b) Au fonctionnaire s ur o rdre écrit d u G ouvernement;
c) Au ministre d u culte et à l ’avocat.
(4) Le tribunal p eut p rononcer les d échéances prévues à l’article 30 d u présent Code.
Article 311 — V iolation des secrets d’affaires.
(1) Quiconque révèle, s ans l'autorisation de la p ersonne à laquelle i l a ppartient, u n f ait ou u n p rocédé i ndustriel o u c ommercial
dont i l a e u c onnaissance à raison de s on emploi, sera p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d e trois m ois à trois a ns et d 'une a mende
de 100 0 00 à 5 m illions de francs ou d e l'une d e c es deux p eines s eulement.
(2) Le t ribunal p eut p rononcer les d échéances prévues à l’article 3 0 d u présent Code.
Article 312 — C orruption d ’un e mployé.
Tout s alarié rémunéré sous quelque f orme q ue c e s oit q ui, sans l 'autorisation d e s on employeur, reçoit d es dons o u a ccepte des promesses
d'accomplir o u de s 'abstenir d 'accomplir u n a cte de s on service, sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement d 'un à trois a ns et d 'une a mende d e
50 000 à 5 00 000 f rancs ou d e l'une de c es d eux peines s eulement.
Article 313 — T romperie e nvers les a ssociés.
(1) Tout a dministrateur, gérant, a dministrateur o u c ommissaire aux comptes d'une s ociété qui, d ans le but de tromper u n o u p lusieurs
associés, a ctionnaires ou c réanciers, fait u ne f ausse d éclaration ou f ournit u n faux compte, sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement d 'un à cinq ans et
d'une a mende d e 50 0 00 à 1 million de f rancs.
(2) Le t ribunal p eut é galement p rononcer les d échéances prévues à l’article 3 0 d u p résent Code.
Article 314 — F aux en écritures privées ou c ommerciales.
(1) Quiconque contrefait o u falsifie un acte s ous seing p rivé c ontenant une o bligation, une d isposition ou une d écharge, s oit
dans l e fond, s oit d ans les s ignatures, d ates o u c ertificats, s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement d e t rois à huit a ns et d 'une a mende d e 5 0 0 00
à 1 m illion de f rancs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) L a peine est u n emprisonnement de cinq à d ix ans et u ne a mende de 1 00 000 à 2 m illions d e f rancs s 'il
s'agit :
a) D’un document commercial ou bancaire ;
(b) U n d ocument certifiant u n droit f oncier;
(c) Le m andat d e s igner l’un des documents v isés aux points a) e t b);
d) D ’un testament;
(3) Quiconque utilise :
Extrait d'un des é crits m entionnés ci­dessus ;
D'une é criture désuète e n l a p résentant comme toujours valable ;
D'un é crit f aisant r éférence à u ne a utre personne tout en prétendant être cette personne.
Article 3 15 — Contrefaçon d e certificat.
(1) Quiconque contrefait o u falsifie un c ertificat p rivé ou d élivre un faux c ertificat n on
punissable par ailleurs ou utilise u n c ertificat p rivé contrefait, f alsifié o u faux s era puni
d'un emprisonnement d'un m ois à u n an.
(2) L a p eine est d oublée en c as de f aux, de f abrication o u d 'usage d'un c ertificat médical ou
d'un é crit s ous seing p rivé non p révu à l 'article 314.
CHAPITRE IV
DOMMAGES M ATÉRIELS.
Section I
DESTRUCTION.
Article 316 — D estruction.
(1) Q uiconque d étruit, même p artiellement, u n bien appartenant e n tout o u en p artie à
autrui ou g revé d'une c harge en f aveur d 'autrui, s era p uni d'un e mprisonnement de q uinze
jours à t rois ans et d'une amende d e 5 0 00 à 100 000 f rancs ou de l 'une de c es deux peines seulement.
(2) L a p eine est u n e mprisonnement d e deux à d ix a ns e t une a mende de 1 0 0 00 à 5 00 0 00 f rancs o u l 'une d e c es deux
peines seulement s i la d estruction concerne des b âtiments, o uvrages, navires ou i nstallations.
Article 3 17 — Destruction des b ornes o u des c lôtures.
Toute p ersonne qui :

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Supprime o u déplace u ne b orne o u t out autre panneau é tabli p our marquer l a limite entre d ifférentes p ropriétés ;
Détruit une c lôture d e t oute sorte.
Section I I
INFRACTIONS C ONTRE LA R ICHESSE D'AUTRUI.
Article 3 18 — ( L. n°90­061 du 1 9 d éc. 1 990). V ol, abus de c onfiance, e scroquerie.
(1) Quiconque p orte atteinte a u b ien d'autrui s era p uni d'un emprisonnement d e c inq à d ix ans et d 'une amende de 1 00
000 à 1 000 0 00 d e f rancs :
a) P ar vol, c'est­à­dire e n p renant l a chose d'autrui ;
b) P ar abus de c onfiance, c'est­à­dire en d étournant, détruisant o u d issipant u n b ien qui p ourrait être volé e t q u'il a
reçu à condition de l e conserver, d e l e restituer, d e l e représenter o u d 'en f aire u n u sage déterminé.
Toutefois, l e p résent paragraphe ne s ’applique pas a ux prêts d’argent ni aux p rêts à l a consommation ;
(c) Par f raude, c'est­à­dire en d éterminant faussement la v ictime s oit p ar d es manœuvres, soit e n a ffirmant o u
en cachant u n fait.
(2) Le t ribunal p eut é galement p rononcer l es d échéances p révues à l’article 3 0 d u p résent C ode.
Article 3 19 — V ol spécial e t a bus de c onfiance.
L'article 3 18 e st applicable :
(1) À q uiconque s ’approprie i ndûment l’énergie d ’une f orce motrice quelconque ;
(2) À q uiconque, s ans i ntention d e s 'approprier le b ien d'autrui, e n u se sans droit ;
(3) À c elui qui s ’approprie u ne chose p erdue ;
(4) A u d ébiteur g agé qui s oustrait o u détourne le bien g agé.
Article 3 20 — ( L. n °90­0610 d u 1 9 d éc. 1 990). V ol aggravé.
(1) Les peines p révues à l'article 318 s ont doublées s i le v ol a été commis :
­ Recourir à l a v iolence ;
­ A vec port d'armes ;
­ Par e ffraction e xtérieure, p ar escalade ou à l’aide d’une fausse clé ;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
­ Utiliser u n v éhicule à moteur.
(2) Q uiconque commet un v ol a vec v iolence a yant e ntraîné la mort d'autrui ou des
blessures graves, comme prévu a ux articles 2 77 e t 2 79 d u présent C ode, s era puni d e la peine
de m ort.
Article 3 21 — Abus de c onfiance a ggravé e t escroquerie.
Les p eines prévues à l'article 3 18 sont doublées s i l'abus de c onfiance o u l'escroquerie a été commise :
Par un avocat, u n notaire, un c ommissaire­priseur, u n huissier, un a gent d 'exécution o u p ar u n m andataire d'affaires ;
Par un s alarié a u d étriment de s on employeur ou inversement ;
Par une p ersonne faisant appel o u ayant f ait a ppel a u p ublic.
Article 3 22 — Filouteries.
(1) Q uiconque, é tant i ncapable de p ayer :
Se v oit servir d es b oissons o u d e l a nourriture qu'il a consommées s ur place ; ou
Occupe u ne c hambre d ans u n h ôtel ; o u
Louez u ne v oiture g ratuitement.
(2) Dans les c as prévus au p aragraphe 1 , lettres a ) et b), l a durée de l a fourniture d e
boissons o u de n ourriture o u d e l 'occupation du l ogement n e d oit pas avoir dépassé une semaine.
(3) Quiconque retient i llégalement l e b ien d'autrui s era puni d es mêmes peines.
Article 3 23 — Immunités.
Les a rticles 3 18, 3 19 et 322 ne s 'appliquent pas entre époux, e ntre ascendants e t d escendants légitimes o u adoptifs o u entre
ascendants et descendants naturels j usqu'au deuxième degré s 'ils v ivent e nsemble ou s ont reconnus, contre la veuve ou le veuf sur les
biens essentiels qui a ppartenaient à l'époux décédé.
Article 3 24 — ( Loi n ° 90­096 d u 1 9 décembre 1990) Recel.
(1) Q uiconque détient ou d ispose d e choses obtenues a u moyen d 'une i nfraction, s oit sciemment, soit avec des r aisons d e soupçonner
leur o rigine c riminelle, est p uni des peines de l 'article 318.
(2) En cas d e crime, les p eines s ont d oublées.
Article 3 25 — U sure.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) T out p rêteur qui e xige ou r eçoit des intérêts ou autres rémunérations s upérieurs aux t aux
fixés p ar l a l oi p our les prêts d e m ême nature s era puni d'une a mende de 5 000 à 1 million de francs.
nature.
(2) En cas d e récidive, la p eine est un e mprisonnement de q uinze jours à un a n e t l'amende e st portée au d ouble.
(3) L e tribunal peut o rdonner la publication d e s a d écision dans les conditions prévues à l'article 3 3 du
présent Code.
(4) A ux f ins du p résent a rticle, l ’emprunteur n’est pas considéré comme un complice.
Article 326 — V entes interdites.
Toute personne q ui :
Propose d es b iens a u p ublic d ans l’espoir d ’obtenir c es biens g ratuitement ou u ne
réduction de prix s ’il place d es b ons a uprès de t iers ou d ésigne d es tiers pour l’achat ;
Envoie des marchandises à u n destinataire sans demande préalable d e celui­ci, indiquant
que l e destinataire a l e c hoix e ntre l'achat ou le retour, m ême s i c e retour peut être e ffectué
sans f rais pour l e d estinataire.
Article 3 27 — Propriété artistique.
(1) Q uiconque, au mépris des l ois e t r èglements relatifs à la propriété des auteurs :
Publie e n t out o u en partie des é crits, des c ompositions musicales, des d essins, d es peintures
ou t oute autre p roduction imprimée ou gravée ; ou
Met d ans le commerce, exporte o u i mporte une œ uvre ainsi c ontrefaite ; o u
Reproduit, r eprésente o u d istribue par q uelque m oyen que c e soit u ne œ uvre de l'esprit.
(2) L a confiscation d e l 'objet d e l 'infraction ainsi q ue des p laques, m oules e t matrices ayant s ervi
à l a contrefaçon e st également ordonnée, a insi q ue la c onfiscation du p roduit o btenu par la
reproduction, l a r eprésentation ou l a d istribution illicite, et l e p roduit d e c ette c onfiscation
est a ffecté à l'indemnisation des personnes l ésées.
(3) L e tribunal peut o rdonner la publication d e s a d écision dans les conditions prévues à l'article 3 3 du
présent Code.
Article 3 28 — B revet d ’invention.
(1) Quiconque exploite i ndûment un brevet ou r ecèle, v end, exporte ou i mporte
un o bjet c ontrefait sera p uni d 'une amende d e 5 0 0 00 à 3 00 0 00 f rancs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) En cas d e récidive o u si l e c oupable est ou a été e mployé d ans l 'établissement où le brevet était r égulièrement utilisé,
une peine d 'emprisonnement d 'un à six m ois p eut également ê tre prononcée.
(3) Dans tous l es c as, l e t ribunal d oit ordonner l a confiscation de l'objet c ontrefaisant a u profit d u titulaire d u brevet et
peut o rdonner l a p ublication d e sa décision dans l es conditions p révues à l'article 33 d u présent Code.
(4) L'action p ublique ne peut être exercée que sur plainte d e la partie l ésée.
Article 3 29 — Dessins et modèles industriels.
(1) Quiconque exploite i ndûment un dessin o u modèle e nregistré e st puni d 'une a mende de 50 000 à 300 000.
francs.
(2) En cas d e récidive o u si l e c ontrevenant travaille o u a travaillé p our la personne lésée, u ne p eine d'emprisonnement
d'un à six mois p eut également ê tre prononcée.
(3) Dans tous l es c as, l e t ribunal d oit ordonner l a confiscation au profit d e la partie l ésée de l'objet p ortant atteinte a ux
droits garantis ; i l p eut également ordonner l a p ublication d e sa décision d ans l es conditions p révues à l'article 33 du
présent C ode e t priver le c ondamné du droit d 'être é ligible e t élu aux chambres de commerce p our une durée
n'excédant p as d ix a ns.
années.
(4) L'action p ublique ne peut être exercée que sur plainte d e la partie l ésée.
Article 3 30 — Marques.
(1) Quiconque porte atteinte à une marque d éposée o u fait u sage d'une m arque contrefaite s era puni d 'un
emprisonnement d e trois mois à trois a ns et d'une a mende d e 50 000 à 300 000 francs ou de l'une de ces d eux
peines s eulement.
(2) Quiconque, sans p orter a tteinte à une marque d éposée, f ait u ne imitation d e nature à tromper l'acheteur o u f ait
usage d e la m arque imitée s era puni d 'un emprisonnement d'un m ois à un an e t d'une amende de 50 0 00 à 150
000 francs ou de l'une d e ces d eux peines s eulement.
(3) Dans tous l es c as, l e t ribunal d oit prononcer l a c onfiscation au profit d u titulaire d e la marque contrefaite o u
imitée ; i l peut é galement ordonner l a publication d e s a d écision d ans les conditions p révues à l'article 33 du présent
Code e t priver le c ondamné du droit d 'être éligible et élu a ux chambres de commerce p our une
durée n 'excédant p as dix a ns.
Section I II
FAILLITE.
Article 3 31 — Débiteur f rauduleux.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) Tout débiteur, même non c ommerçant, q ui, pour s e s oustraire a u p aiement d 'un ou p lusieurs de s es créanciers, donne,
livre, transfère, grève, enlève ou d issimule tout o u p artie d e s es biens, s era p uni d'un emprisonnement de q uinze j ours à u n
an.
(2) En cas de v ol ou d e r ecel dans les d eux m ois précédant une décision d e j ustice, même non définitive, la f inalité e st p résumée.
Article 332 — Faillite simple.
(1) Tout commerçant q ui, en é tat d e c essation de p aiements, ou a vant cette cessation dans les c as où e lle en e st l a
conséquence, s era p uni d 'un e mprisonnement d 'un m ois à d eux a ns :
­ E ngage d es d épenses p ersonnelles ou d omestiques c onsidérées comme e xcessives ; o u
­ D épenser des sommes i mportantes soit dans des transactions p urement a léatoires, s oit dans d es t ransactions fictives sur l e marché boursier ou sur l es
matières p remières ; ou
­ C ontracte pour l e c ompte d 'autrui sans r ecevoir a ucune v aleur e n é change, des engagements t rop c onsidérables
eu égard à sa s ituation a u m oment où i l l es a contractés.
(2) Tout commerçant q ui, a yant c essé s es paiements :
Se livre s oit à des achats pour revendre a u­dessous du p rix du m arché, s oit à d es e mprunts, à l a c irculation d 'effets o u à d 'autres
moyens ruineux d'obtenir des f onds ;
Paie un c réancier au d étriment de l a succession ; o u
Ne fait pas la d éclaration complète r equise par la l oi au g reffe d ans l es q uinze j ours d e c ette c essation.
(3) Tout commerçant e n f aillite q ui :
­ E st à nouveau déclaré e n f aillite s ans avoir rempli l es o bligations d 'un arrangement antérieur ; ou
­ V iole l a réglementation en v igueur r elative a u registre du c ommerce ; ou
­ N 'a pas tenu d es l ivres e t d es i nventaires a vec exactitude ou a t enu des l ivres ou d es i nventaires d e m anière
incomplète o u i rrégulière ou a tenu d es l ivres o u des i nventaires q ui, sans q u'il y a it fraude, n e r eflètent n éanmoins pas
la v éritable situation active ou p assive ; o u
­ S ans e mpêchement légitime ne comparaît p as e n personne d evant l es syndics dans les c as e t d ans les d élais f ixés.
(4) La m ême peine s'applique a ux b anquiers, a gents de c hange et c ourtiers q ui ont purement et s implement cessé leurs p aiements.
Article 3 33 — Faillite frauduleuse.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(1) T out c ommerçant q ui c esse d 'effectuer s es p aiements e st p uni d'un e mprisonnement de c inq à dix ans.
Et :
­ S oustrait ses l ivres ; o u
­ D étourne o u dissimule u ne partie de ses a ctifs ; o u
­ S oit par écrit, soit par actes p ublics o u engagements sous s eing p rivé, soit p ar son b ilan, se r econnaît f rauduleusement
débiteur d e sommes q u'il n e devait p as.
(2) L es peines s ont doublées à l'égard d u banquier, d e l'agent de change ou du c ourtier.
Article 3 34 — Dirigeants s ociaux.
(1) Seront punis d es p eines p révues à l 'article 332 :
Tout d irigeant d 'entreprise q ui, e n cette q ualité, commet l'un des a ctes visés à l 'article 3 32 ( 1) b ) e t c), ( 2) a ) e t b), (3) c ) ;
Toute p ersonne v isée à l 'alinéa a) c i­dessus q ui, pour s oustraire tout o u partie d e son patrimoine a ux poursuites d e la société en
état de c essation d es paiements ou à c elles des a ssociés o u créanciers s ociaux, détourne o u dissimule u ne p artie d e s on
patrimoine o u s e r econnaît d ébitrice d e sommes q u'elle n e doit pas.
(2) T out dirigeant s ocial q ui, e n c ette qualité, c ommet l'un d es actes v isés audit article e st puni d es peines prévues
à l'article 3 33 (1).
Article 3 35 — Infractions c ommises p ar une personne a utre que l e failli.
(1) S eront punis d'un e mprisonnement de cinq à dix ans :
Quiconque, d ans l 'intérêt d 'un commerçant e n cessation d e paiements, s oustrait o u dissimule t out o u partie d es b iens de ce d ernier
actifs;
Quiconque, d ans u ne faillite, p résente o u fait v aloir, d irectement ou i ndirectement, u ne f ausse réclamation.
(2) M ême en c as de complicité, l a p eine est l 'emprisonnement d 'un à c inq a ns c ontre l e conjoint, l e descendant ou
l'ascendant d udit commerçant q ui d étourne o u dissimule t out ou p artie d es biens.
Article 3 36 — Avantages i llégitimes d ’un créancier.
(1) L e c réancier d ’un failli q ui :
Stipule s oit a u f ailli, soit à t oute autre p ersonne, d es avantages p articuliers e n raison d e son v ote lors des d élibérations d e la faillite ; ou

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Conclut u n traité spécial qui lui p rocurerait u n avantage au d étriment des biens du failli.
(2) Les peines sont d oublées si le c oupable e st u n syndic de faillite.
CHAPITRE V
ATTAQUES C ONTRE LES E NFANTS E T LES F AMILLES.
Article 337 — Avortement.
(1) La femme qui se procure elle­même un a vortement o u qui y consent s era punie d 'un e mprisonnement d e quinze j ours à u n an et
d'une amende de 5 000 à 2 00 000 francs o u de l'une d e ces deux p eines s eulement.
(2) Quiconque, m ême avec son c onsentement, p rocure à une f emme un avortement sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d'un à c inq ans et d 'une
amende de 100 0 00 à 2 0 00 000 de francs.
(3) Les peines prévues au paragraphe 2 s ont doublées :
Contre toute p ersonne qui pratique habituellement des a vortements ;
Contre une p ersonne qui e xerce u ne profession m édicale o u en rapport avec cette p rofession.
(4) La fermeture d es locaux p rofessionnels e t l 'interdiction d 'exercer la p rofession peuvent également être p rononcées d ans l es
conditions prévues aux a rticles 3 4 e t 3 6 du présent code.
Article 338 — Violence contre une femme e nceinte.
Quiconque, par v iolences e xercées s ur une femme e nceinte ou sur u n enfant à n aître, a ura causé, même involontairement, l a m ort o u
l'infirmité permanente de l'enfant, sera p uni d'un e mprisonnement de cinq à d ix a ns et d 'une a mende de 100 000 à 2 0 00 000 de francs.
Article 3 39 — Exceptions.
(1) Les articles 337 e t 3 38 ne sont p as a pplicables s i les actes s ont accomplis par une personne autorisée et j ustifiés par la n écessité d e
sauver la mère d'un danger grave pour sa santé.
(2) En cas d e grossesse résultant d 'un v iol, l'avortement m édicamenteux ne constitue p as une infraction s 'il e st pratiqué a près
constatation par l e m inistère p ublic d e la m atérialité d es f aits.
Article 3 40 — Infanticide.
La mère auteur principal ou complice du meurtre ou de l 'assassinat d e son enfant dans l e m ois d e sa n aissance n'est punie q ue de la
réclusion c riminelle d e cinq à d ix ans, s ans que ces d ispositions soient applicables a ux autres auteurs o u complices.
Article 3 41 — Infringement o f f iliation.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Quiconque, p ar s es a ctes, a p our effet d e p river un enfant de l a preuve d e s a f iliation s era puni d 'un e mprisonnement
de cinq à d ix a ns.
Article 342 — E sclavage e t m ise en g age.
Lorsque la v ictime est u n m ineur de m oins d e d ix­huit ans :
La p eine est u n e mprisonnement de q uinze à vingt ans d ans le cas d'un c rime tel q ue défini à l 'article 293 (1) ;
La p eine est u n e mprisonnement de c inq à d ix ans e t u ne amende de 5 0 0 00 à 1 0 00 000 de f rancs e n cas d'infraction d éfinie à l 'article
293 (2) e t l es d échéances p révues à l 'article 30 d u présent c ode p euvent être prononcées.
Article 343 (nouveau).­ — P rostitution.
(1) E st puni d'un e mprisonnement de s ix mois à c inq ans et d'une amende de 2 0 0 00 à 500 000 francs, t oute personne d e
l'un o u l'autre s exe q ui s e livre h abituellement à d es a ctes d'ordre s exuel a vec u ne autre p ersonne c ontre rémunération.
(2) Q uiconque, en v ue d e la p rostitution o u de l a débauche, aura sollicité publiquement des personnes de l'un o u l 'autre s exe,
par g estes, p aroles, é crits ou par tout a utre moyen, s era p uni d es mêmes peines.
Article 344 (nouveau).­ — C orruption d e la j eunesse.
(1) Q uiconque aura p rovoqué, encouragé ou facilité la d ébauche o u l a corruption d'une personne â gée d e m oins d e v ingt et un a ns
sera p uni d'un emprisonnement d'un à c inq ans e t d 'une amende de 2 0 0 00 à 1 000 000 de f rancs.
(2) L es peines sont doublées si l a v ictime e st âgée d e moins d e s eize ans.
(3) L e tribunal p eut é galement prononcer l es déchéances d e l 'article 30 d u p résent Code et priver le condamné p our la même
durée de l 'autorité parentale, de t oute tutelle o u curatelle.
Article 345 — D anger m oral.
Quiconque, a yant l a g arde l égale ou c outumière d 'un e nfant â gé de m oins d e d ix­huit ans, l ui p ermet d e r ésider d ans
une maison o u u n établissement où s 'exerce l a p rostitution ou d'y travailler o u p our une prostituée s era puni d 'un
emprisonnement d e q uinze j ours à s ix m ois et d 'une amende de 1 0 0 00 à 100 000 francs.
Article 346 (nouveau).­ — A ttentat à l a p udeur d 'un m ineur d e seize ans.
(1) Q uiconque commet un a cte indécent e n présence d 'un mineur d e seize ans accomplis sera puni d 'un e mprisonnement
de d eux à c inq a ns e t d 'une a mende de 2 0 000 à 2 00 000 f rancs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(2) Les p eines sont d oublées s i l'injure e st commise a vec violence ou si l 'auteur est l'une d es personnes v isées à l'article 2 98.
(3) La peine est l 'emprisonnement de d ix à quinze a ns si l 'auteur a eu des rapports s exuels même a vec le c onsentement d e la victime.
(4) En cas de viol, l a peine d'emprisonnement e st de quinze à v ingt­cinq ans. L a r éclusion criminelle e st perpétuelle si l'auteur e st
l'une d es personnes énumérées à l 'article 2 98.
(5) Dans t ous les cas, le tribunal p eut p river le c ondamné de l 'autorité parentale, de t oute t utelle o u c uratelle pendant l es
délais prévus à l 'article 31 (4) d u présent Code.
Article 3 47 (nouveau).­ — Injure envers un mineur â gé d e s eize à v ingt et un a ns.
(1) Lorsque les infractions visées aux a rticles 295, 2 96 e t 3 47 bis o nt é té c ommises s ur u n m ineur â gé de s eize à v ingt et un a ns,
les peines prévues a uxdits articles sont d oublées.
(2) Le tribunal p eut dans t ous les c as p river le condamné d e l 'autorité parentale, de t oute t utelle ou c uratelle pendant l es
délais prévus à l 'article 31 du présent Code.
Article 3 47 bis — Homosexualité.
Quiconque a ura d es r elations sexuelles avec u ne p ersonne du m ême sexe s era p uni d 'un emprisonnement de s ix m ois à c inq
ans et d 'une amende de 20 000 à 2 00 0 00 f rancs.
Article 3 48 — B oissons.
(1) S eront punis d'une a mende d e 5 0 00 à 5 0 0 00 f rancs :
Le détaillant de boissons alcoolisées qui r eçoit dans s on é tablissement un m ineur d e m oins de s eize ans n on accompagné
d'un a dulte de vingt et un ans qui le s urveille ;
­ L e détaillant d'alcool qui vend o u offre des b oissons alcoolisées dans son é tablissement ou d ans tout autre lieu p ublic à u n m ineur
de moins de dix­huit a ns qui n 'est pas a ccompagné d'un a dulte d e v ingt et un a ns q ui le s urveille;
­ Q uiconque fait b oire j usqu'à l'ivresse u n mineur d e moins d e v ingt e t un a ns.
(2) En cas de récidive, la peine d'emprisonnement e st de q uinze j ours à u n m ois et l'amende d e 1 0 000 à 1 00 000 francs. L e
tribunal p eut également :
Ordonner la fermeture de l'établissement d u commerçant c ondamné dans les c onditions prévues à l 'article 34 d u
ce C ode;
Ordonner la publication de sa d écision ;
Prononcer contre t out condamné l es d échéances prévues à l 'article 30 d u p résent Code.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
(3) L e p résent a rticle ne s 'applique p as à c elui q ui p rouve a voir été i nduit en e rreur sur l 'âge du m ineur o u s ur l 'âge ou l a qualité
de l a personne qui l 'accompagne.
Article 3 49 — A bus de faiblesse.
(1) Q uiconque abuse des besoins, des faiblesses o u des p assions d 'une personne â gée de m oins d e vingt et un a ns p our lui faire
contracter une obligation, une disposition o u u ne quittance, o u u n a cte d e n ature à compromettre l a personne o u l a fortune
du s ignataire, s era p uni d es peines prévues à l 'article 318 du p résent code.
(2) Aux f ins d u présent a rticle, e st considérée comme mineure toute p ersonne q ui est sous le c oup d ’une interdiction j udiciaire,
qui a r ecours à u n avocat ou qui e st d ans u n état de démence manifeste.
Article 3 50 — V iolences e nvers les e nfants.
(1) L es peines prévues aux articles 2 75, 277 e t 278 du p résent C ode sont respectivement la mort e t la réclusion
criminelle à p erpétuité s i l es i nfractions visées a uxdits articles ont é té c ommises à l'égard d 'un m ineur d e m oins d e q uinze a ns, e t les
peines p révues a ux a rticles 279 (1), 280 et 2 81 sont dans c e cas d oublées.
(2) Le t ribunal peut p rononcer l es déchéances prévues à l 'article 30 d u présent Code pour les infractions v isées a u p résent a rticle.
Article 3 51 — V iolence a gainst ascendants.
La p eine p révue à l 'article 275 e st la m ort et c elles prévues a ux a rticles 2 77 e t 278 s ont l a réclusion c riminelle à
perpétuité s i l es i nfractions visées a uxdits a rticles ont é té c ommises c ontre l es parents légitimes, naturels ou a doptifs ou t out
autre a scendant légitime d u c oupable et les p eines prévues a ux a rticles 2 79 ( 1), 280 e t 281 s ont doublées.
Article 3 52 — E nlèvement d e m ineurs.
(1) Quiconque, sans f raude n i v iolence, aura e nlevé, e ntraîné o u d étourné u n mineur d e d ix­huit a ns c ontre l a volonté d e
ceux à q ui i l a ppartient d e f açon légale o u coutumière, s era puni d'un e mprisonnement d 'un à cinq ans e t d'une amende de 2 0 0 00
à 2 00 000 francs.
Toutefois, c e paragraphe n e s ’applique p as à c elui q ui prouve a voir été t rompé s ur l ’âge de l a victime.
(2) Le p résent a rticle ne s'applique p as au c as où le m ineur a insi enlevé, a ttiré o u détourné é pouse l'auteur d e l 'enlèvement,
à m oins q ue le mariage n 'ait é té d éclaré n ul e t non a venu.
Article 3 53 — E nlèvement a vec f raude o u v iolence.
Quiconque, par fraude ou v iolence, aura e nlevé, e ntraîné ou d étourné u n m ineur â gé d e m oins de v ingt et un a ns, m ême s 'il le
croit p lus âgé, c ontre l a v olonté d e c eux q ui e n o nt l a garde légale o u coutumière, sera puni d'un e mprisonnement d e c inq à dix ans
et d 'une amende de 20 0 00 à 4 00 000 francs.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article 354 — Aggravation.
Dans les c as prévus aux deux a rticles p récédents :
1° La p eine e st la r éclusion c riminelle à p erpétuité :
­ Si l e mineur a moins d e seize ans ; ou
­ Si l e coupable a l’intention d ’obtenir u ne r ançon o u en a o btenu une.
2° L a peine est la m ort lorsque l a m ort du mineur e n résulte.
Article 355 — Non­représentation.
Quiconque, a yant l a c harge d'un e nfant, ne l e p résente pas à c eux qui o nt le droit de le réclamer, s era p uni d 'un
emprisonnement d'un à cinq ans et d 'une a mende de 2 0 000 à 2 00 000 francs.
Article 356 — Mariage f orcé.
(1) Q uiconque a ura contraint u ne personne à se marier sera p uni d 'un emprisonnement d e c inq à d ix ans e t d'une a mende
de 2 5 0 00 à 1 000 000 de f rancs.
(2) L orsque l a victime e st un mineur d e moins de d ix­huit ans, la peine d 'emprisonnement, en c as d'application
de c irconstances atténuantes, n e peut être inférieure à d eux a ns.
(3) Q uiconque d onne en m ariage u ne fille âgée d e moins d e quatorze a ns o u un g arçon âgé de moins de s eize ans s era
puni des p eines prévues a ux deux a linéas p récédents.
(4) L e t ribunal p eut également priver l e c ondamné d e l'autorité p arentale, d e t oute tutelle o u c uratelle p endant la durée
prévue à l'article 31 ( 4) du p résent Code.
Article 357 — Demande a busive d e dot.
(1) S eront p unis d 'un emprisonnement de t rois mois à c inq ans e t d'une amende de 5 0 00 à 5 00 000 francs o u de
l'une d e c es deux peines seulement :
­ Celui q ui, en p romettant le m ariage d 'une f emme d éjà mariée o u e ngagée d ans d es f iançailles non
rompues, r eçoit d 'un tiers tout ou p artie d 'une dot ;
­ Celui q ui reçoit t out ou partie d 'une d ot s ans a voir remboursé a ucun prétendant é conduit ;
­ Celui q ui, sans r éserve, reçoit t out ou partie d'une d ot e n vue d u mariage d 'une f emme ;
­ Quiconque a ura exigé t out ou partie d 'une d ot excessive à l 'occasion du mariage d 'une jeune f ille de vingt e t un
ans o u d 'une femme veuve o u divorcée ;
­ Quiconque, e n e xigeant une dot e xcessive, empêche p our ce seul motif le mariage d 'une fille mineure d e vingt e t
un a ns accomplis ;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
­ L 'héritier qui r eçoit l es avantages matériels prévus a ux alinéas précédents e t p romis à celui d ont i l h érite.
(2) Tout versement, même partiel, de l a dot i nterrompt l e d élai de prescription d e l'action p ublique.
Article 358 — A bandon d u d omicile.
(1) Tout époux, p ère o u m ère q ui, sans m otif légitime, se soustrait, e n abandonnant l e domicile f amilial ou par tout
autre moyen, à t out o u p artie de s es o bligations morales o u matérielles e nvers son conjoint o u son o u ses
enfants, sera puni d 'un emprisonnement de t rois mois à un an ou d'une amende de 5 000 à 500 000 francs.
(2) Si l 'infraction est commise a u p réjudice d'un seul époux, les p oursuites n e peuvent être e ngagées q ue
sur plainte p réalable de l 'époux abandonné.
(3) Les mêmes peines s'appliquent à tout t uteur ou curateur c outumier qui manque à ses o bligations l égales ou
coutumières à l 'égard des enfants d ont il a l a garde.
(4) Le tribunal p eut prononcer les d échéances d e l'article 3 0 du présent Code e t p river le condamné de toute tutelle
ou curatelle p endant la durée p révue à l 'article 31 ( 4) d u présent Code e t le p river de l'autorité parentale
pendant l a m ême d urée à l 'égard d'un ou p lusieurs de ses e nfants.
(5) Lorsque l e c omplice e st celui q ui a r eçu tout ou p artie de la dot, il est p uni d 'un emprisonnement
de trois m ois à u n a n e t d 'une amende d e 5 0 0 00 à 500 000 francs.
Article 359 — Bigamie.
(1) S eront punis d'un emprisonnement d e d eux m ois à d eux ans et d'une a mende de 2 5 000 à 5 00 0 00 francs :
Le polygame q ui c ontracte u n m ariage monogame a vant la dissolution d es mariages p récédents ;
Celui qui, l ié p ar u n e ngagement de m onogamie, c ontracte u n nouveau m ariage monogame o u un mariage
polygame a vant la dissolution du m ariage précédent ;
Celui qui, m arié s elon les r ègles d u C ode civil, contracte u n nouveau m ariage a vant la dissolution d u
précédent.
(2) La charge de l a preuve de l a dissolution d u p remier mariage incombe à l’accusé.
Article 360 — Inceste.
(1) I ndépendamment d es p eines prévues a ux a rticles 3 46 (3) e t 347 (1), q uiconque a des relations sexuelles :
Avec ses a scendants ou d escendants l égitimes ou naturels, sans l imitation d e degré ;

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Avec s es frères ou s œurs l égitimes o u n aturels, germains, c onsanguins o u u térins.
(2) S auf en cas d e concubinage notoire ou d e m ariage incestueux, l 'action ne p eut être
intentée q ue s ur la p lainte d 'un d es p arents c onsanguins sans limitation d e d egré.
Article 361 — A dultère.
(1) La f emme m ariée q ui a des r elations sexuelles avec u ne personne a utre que son mari sera
punie d'un emprisonnement d e deux à six m ois ou d'une amende d e 25 000 à 1 00 000 francs.
(2) Les m êmes p eines s'appliquent au mari qui, a u d omicile conjugal, a des relations s exuelles avec des f emmes autres que son o u
ses épouses, ou q ui, hors du d omicile c onjugal, a d es relations s exuelles habituelles a vec une autre f emme.
femme.
(3) L es poursuites n e peuvent être e ngagées que sur p lainte du c onjoint l ésé.
(4) La connivence ou le p ardon d e l'époux o ffensé e mpêche o u a rrête t oute p oursuite e t l'époux
offensé r este maître d e l 'arrêt de l 'effet de l a s entence p rononcée c ontre l'autre é poux en
acceptant de reprendre l a v ie c ommune.
TITRE IV
AMENDES.
CHAPITRE I
DISPOSITIONS GÉNÉRALES.
Article 362 — C lasses of contraventions.
Sous r éserve des d ispositions de l'article 1 01 (2), l es c ontraventions s ont d ivisées en q uatre c lasses e t les p eines suivantes leur
sont a pplicables :
­ C eux de l a première classe, d 'une a mende d e 2 00 à 1.200 f rancs inclus ;
­ C eux de l a deuxième classe, d 'une a mende d e 1.400 à 2.400 f rancs inclus ;
­ C eux de l a troisième c lasse, d'une a mende de 2 .600 à 3.600 f rancs inclus ;
­ C eux de l a quatrième c lasse, d 'une a mende d e 4.000 à 25.000 f rancs inclus e t d'un emprisonnement d e c inq à dix j ours
ou d e l'une de c es deux p eines seulement.
Article 363 — R écidive.
Outre l e d oublement d es p eines maximales prévues à l 'article 8 8 ( 1) c ), le t ribunal p eut, e n c as d e r écidive des trois p remières
classes, p rononcer u ne peine d'emprisonnement d ont l e minimum n e p eut ê tre i nférieur à cinq jours e t le m aximum supérieur à dix
jours.
Article R. 364 — Contrainte c orporelle.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
1. L a contrainte corporelle a lieu p our l e paiement de l 'amende.
2. I l e st fixé à cinq jours pour les amendes de 1ère c lasse, à d ix j ours pour l es a mendes d e 2ème classe e t à u n mois p our l es a mendes d e 3ème et 4 ème
classes.
Toutefois, le condamné n e p eut ê tre détenu p lus d e q uinze j ours à c ette f in s 'il peut p rouver s on i nsolvabilité.
Article R . 365 — Préférence.
En cas d'insuffisance d e b iens, l a r estitution e t l'indemnisation dues à la partie lésée sont préférées à l'amende.
Article R . 366 — Restitutions.
Les restitutions, indemnités e t f rais entraînent une p eine d'emprisonnement et l e condamné restera en p rison jusqu'au paiement intégral.
Toutefois, s i ces peines s ont prononcées en f aveur de l 'État, l es condamnés insolvables n e p euvent être d étenus p lus
de quinze j ours.
Article R . 367 — 1st c lass contraventions.
Sont punis d'une a mende de 200 à 1 200 f rancs i nclus :
1. C eux qui négligent d ’entretenir, de réparer ou d e n ettoyer l es fours, les c heminées ou l es usines o ù l e feu est utilisé
2. C eux qui enfreignent l 'interdiction de t irer des f eux d 'artifice d ans certains l ieux. Les f eux d'artifice s aisis s ont é galement
confisqués.
3. L es h ôteliers e t a utres personnes qui, obligés de f ournir un é clairage, s'abstiennent d e l e faire, ainsi que ceux q ui
suppriment un é clairage établi dans l 'intérêt p ublic.
4. C eux qui négligent de nettoyer les rues ou les passages dans les localités où c ette tâche est laissée a ux h abitants
5. C eux q ui obstruent la voie p ublique en y d éposant o u e n y l aissant i nutilement des m atériaux o u o bjets q ui
empêchent o u d iminuent l a liberté o u l a sécurité d u p assage, ainsi que ceux q ui, contrairement a ux l ois e t règlements,
négligent d'éclairer l es matériaux e ntreposés p ar e ux o u l es fouilles faites par e ux d ans les l ieux publics e t sur
les voies publiques.
6. C eux q ui jettent ou exposent d evant leur maison des o bjets s usceptibles d e c auser d es d ommages s oit p ar l eur c hute,
soit par d es e xpirations m alsaines
7. C eux q ui ne respectent p as l es l ois et r èglements concernant l a lutte c ontre les n uisibles de t oute n ature d ans
les campagnes, les plantations o u les jardins

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
8. Ceux q ui, sans a utres c irconstances p révues p ar l a loi, c ueillent des f ruits a ppartenant à a utrui p our l es
consommer sur place
9. Ceux q ui, sans a voir été provoqués, p rofèrent en p ublic d es i nsultes c ontre quelqu'un comme prévu à
l'article 307 ( 1) d u C ode p énal
10. Ceux q ui j ettent imprudemment des d échets sur l es autres
11. Ceux q ui n e s ont ni p ropriétaires, n i u sufruitiers, n i locataires, ni fermiers, ni jouissant d 'une terre
ou d 'un droit d e p assage, ou q ui, n'étant n i agents n i employés d'aucune de c es personnes, p assent s ur
cette t erre ou s ur u ne partie d e c ette t erre s i elle est p réparée o u e nsemencée
12. Les p ersonnes t rouvées en é tat d 'ivresse manifeste dans u n l ieu p ublic
13. Le g reffier q ui c ontrevient a ux d ispositions d e l 'article 23 D 5 du d écret n° 66­DF­237 d u 2 4 m ai 1966 r elatif au
procès­verbal d'exécution c apitale.
Article R . 368 — 2 nd c lass c ontraventions.
Sont p unis d 'une a mende d e 1 4 00 à 2 4 00 f rancs i nclus :
1. Ceux q ui c ontreviennent a ux d ispositions concernant l 'ouverture des c ampagnes agricoles
2. Les h ôteliers et l es propriétaires qui t iennent leur r egistre d 'entrée e t d e s ortie d e m anière incomplète o u
qui n e l e d éposent p as a ux dates fixées par la réglementation ou l orsque les autorités d ésignées à cet e ffet le leur
demandent.
3. C eux qui laissent l es choses v agabonder :
­ P ersonnes démentes d angereuses d ont ils o nt l a charge ;
­ L es a nimaux d angereux ou f éroces, ainsi q ue ceux q ui ne r etiennent p as l eurs animaux lorsqu'ils
attaquent ou p oursuivent les p assants même si aucun d ommage n 'en résulte.
4. Ceux q ui j ettent des c orps durs ou d es d étritus contre les bâtiments, l es maisons ou l es clôtures d'autrui ou
dans l es j ardins ou l es enclos d 'autrui
5. Ceux qui, n'étant ni p ropriétaires, n i u sufruitiers, ni jouissant d 'une terre o u d 'un droit d e p assage, y s ont
entrés avant que l a r écolte n'ait é té faite
6. Ceux qui c onduisent o u l aissent passer leurs véhicules et l es animaux dont i ls ont l a garde s ur u ne t erre
d'autrui préparée, semée ou c hargée d 'une r écolte, e n q uelque s aison que c e s oit, o u d ans u n b ois taillis
appartenant à a utrui.
7. Ceux qui e mploient des f emmes de m oins de d ix­huit ans d ans un m agasin d'alcools pour c onsommation s ur
place, à l 'exception d e c elles appartenant à l a famille d u p ropriétaire du m agasin d'alcools

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
8. Ceux q ui, par n égligence o u imprudence, e ndommagent de quelque m anière q ue ce soit u ne installation o u
les a ppareils d'une installation t éléphonique o u télégraphique.
Article R. 369 — Infractions de 3 e classe.
Sont punis d'une a mende de 2 6 00 à 3 6 00 f rancs inclus :
1. Ceux q ui causent la mort ou l a blessure d 'animaux o u de b étail a ppartenant à autrui, par l'égarement d'un f ou
dangereux, ou d 'animaux dangereux o u p ar une vitesse excessive, u ne mauvaise direction, u ne surcharge
de v éhicules, de c hevaux, d'animaux de trait, d e c harges ou de m ontures
2. Ceux q ui causent les mêmes dommages par l'usage ou l e m aniement d'armes sans p récaution ou avec
maladresse ou e n j etant d es c orps durs
3. Ceux qui causent les mêmes dommages p ar délabrement, détérioration, défaut d e r éparation o u d'entretien
des m aisons ou b âtiments o u p ar obstruction o u e xcavation o u autres t ravaux s emblables, sur
ou à p roximité des v oies publiques sans p récaution ni s ignalisation o rdonnée ou h abituelle.
4. Ceux q ui utilisent d es p oids ou mesures a utres q ue ceux établis p ar les t extes e n v igueur
5. Auteurs ou c omplices de bruits, d e troubles o u d e rassemblements o ffensants ou n octurnes, troublant
la t ranquillité d es r iverains
6. Ceux qui permettent a u bétail dont ils o nt la g arde de s e nourrir s ur l es t erres d'autrui, q uelle qu'en s oit l a n ature.
7. Ceux q ui, sauf d ans l es cas p révus à l 'article 2 30 (1) du C ode p énal, endommagent ou détériorent
de quelque manière q ue c e s oit les voies publiques ou e n usurpent l a l argeur.
8. Ceux q ui, sans y être d ûment autorisés, enlèvent de la t erre, d u sable, des p ierres ou d u gravier des
lieux publics a utres que l a voie publique, à moins qu'il n 'existe u n u sage général q ui l 'autorise.
9. Ceux q ui ont r ecueilli du b étail e rrant o u abandonné n e le d éclarent p as d ans les t rois jours à la m airie
ou au c hef d u v illage.
10. Ceux qui contreviennent o u n e se c onforment pas a ux r èglements ou o rdonnances légalement é tablis e t
régulièrement publiés d e l 'autorité m unicipale.
Toutefois, l'autorité municipale compétente p eut :
Par disposition e xpresse, classer u ne v iolation c omme étant d e p remière ou de deuxième classe ;
Provoquer une d écision de l 'autorité de c ontrôle qualifiant u ne contravention de q uatrième c lasse.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
Article R. 370 — C ontravention de 4e classe.
Seront punis d 'une amende d e 4 000 à 25 000 f rancs inclus et d 'un e mprisonnement de cinq à dix j ours o u de l'une d e ces deux
peines s eulement :
1. Les auteurs e t c omplices d e rixes, v oies d e fait o u v iolences légères n 'entraînant pas d e maladie o u d 'incapacité de t ravail
de plus d e huit j ours, ainsi que ceux q ui jettent volontairement d es c orps d urs ou des d étritus s ur
autres
2. Ceux q ui, s auf dans l es cas prévus à l 'article 2 90 (1) e t ( 2) d u Code p énal, causent, par m aladresse, négligence,
imprudence o u inobservation des r èglements, une maladie ou une incapacité d e travail d e trente jours ou moins.
3. Ceux qui, e n dehors de la chasse, l aissent l eurs chiens errer à la recherche o u à la poursuite d u gibier
4. Ceux qui, s auf dans les c as prévus à l'article 228 du Code p énal, auront p rovoqué, par i mprudence, inattention,
négligence o u inobservation des r èglements, l 'incendie d es b iens m eubles ou immeubles d'autrui.
5. Ceux q ui endommagent l es f ossés, les clôtures e t les h aies o u enlèvent du bois s ec des h aies
6. Ceux qui, p ar tout a utre moyen que c eux p révus a ux a rticles 157 et 1 58 du Code p énal, auront empêché quiconque
agissant pour l 'exécution des l ois, r èglements, d écisions judiciaires ou ordres légitimes d 'accomplir la mission dont il
est légalement chargé.
7. Ceux q ui, s ans m otif l égitime, r efusent ou n égligent d'exécuter un service ou de prêter l 'assistance e xigée par l 'autorité
compétente s oit e n cas de crime o u de délit f lagrant, s oit pour assurer l'exécution d'une décision j udiciaire, soit dans
les circonstances d'accidents, d e troubles, de naufrage, d'inondation, d'incendie o u d'autres c alamités, e t
sans p réjudice de peines plus s évères l e cas échéant.
8. Ceux q ui, s ans p réjudice de sanctions plus sévères l e cas échéant, transmettront par l a poste d es d ocuments o u
objets non a utorisés p ar les textes e n vigueur ou qui donneront une fausse indication du contenu
9. Ceux q ui, s ans p réjudice de peines plus s évères le cas échéant, portent a tteinte a u m onopole des p ostes et
télécommunications o u utilisent s ciemment une installation i rrégulière pour transmettre ou recevoir des m essages.
10. C eux qui, s ans p réjudice de s anctions plus s évères le cas échéant, a uront utilisé dans la f abrication un produit
prohibé par les textes e n vigueur
11. C eux qui, a yant a ssisté à une naissance, n'ont p as f ait l a déclaration d e naissance é ventuellement
prescrite p ar la l oi e t d ans l es d élais f ixés par l a l oi ; c eux qui, ayant t rouvé un enfant nouveau­né, n e le remettent pas à
l'officier de l'état civil o u, s 'ils veulent s'en c harger, n'en f ont p as l a d éclaration à l'officier de l 'état civil d e leur c ommune.

MTraadcuhiti n aeu toTmraantiqsulaetmeedn bt p ya Gr G ooooggllee
12. Ceux qui contreviennent ou ne se conforment pas aux règlements et a rrêtés
légalement pris e t régulièrement p ubliés émanant d'autorités autres q ue c elles visées à l 'article
R. 3 69 (10) ci­dessus.
Toutefois, lesdites autorités p euvent, par d es dispositions expresses, classer l es c ontraventions
qu'elles é mettent dans l'une d es trois classes inférieures.



=== finance_law2024_Part1.pdf ===


REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON PEACE - WORK - FATHERLAND
-----·-----------
-----------------
www.prc.cm
·o· 2 'l- 1 o 1 9
_ L AW N 0 ,_...... :..,l ::.....:...._J _ ___O _ F _ ....:....1 ..;;_9 .:;;..:D E ÿC ÿ 20ÿ23 ___ I
FINANCE LAW O F THE R EPUBLIC OF C AMEROON
FOR THE 2 024 FINANCIAL Y EAR
The P arliament deliberated a nd a dopted, t he
President of the R epublic hereby e nacts the
Law set out below:


PART O NE
GENERAL CONDITIONS F OR B UDGETARY A ND F INANCIAL E QUILIBRIUM
1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION O NE: The p urpose of t his l aw is t o d etermine G ovemment r evenue a nd expenditure,
lay down t he c onditions o f b udgetary and f inancial balance and e stablish the S tate budget f or
2024_
SECTION l WO: S tate r evenue a nd e xpenditure shall include b udgetary r evenue a nd
expenditure as w ell a s c ash and f inancing r esources and expenses.
1. T he S tate b udget shall d etermine t he n ature, amount a nd a llocation o f r evenue a nd
expenditure, t he r esulting b udgetary b alance as well a s the t erms of f inancing.
2. T he S tate b udget shall c omprise t he g eneral b udget a nd S pecial Appropriation
Accounts.
SECTION T HREE: This p art provides f or a nd a uthorizes State r esources, f ixes the ceilings for S tate
expenses and e stablishes t he resulting b udgetary and f inancial b alance.
www.prc.cm
Il - PROVISIONS RELA T ING T O RESOURCES
SECTION F OUR: T he taxes, duties, levies, contributions, r oyalties, other proceeds and p ublic
revenue o f t he R epublic of C ameroon s hall c ontinue t o b e c ollected in accordance w ith the
instruments i n. f orce, s ubject to t he provisions o f t his l aw.
CHAPTER O NE
PROVISIONS R ELATING T O CUSTOMS DUTIES A ND T AXES
SECTION F IVE: S upport to t he drinking w ater, renewable e nergy, health, l ivestock a nd
fisheries p riority sectors.
1. Equipment a nd m aterials i ntended f or drinking w ater, biomass and s olar and w ind
energy production s hall be e xempted from i mport d uties a nd t axes f or a p eriod o f 2 4
(twenty-four) months, from 1 J anuary 2024.
2. M edical e quipment a nd a ppliances, i ncluding their a ccessories, shall be e xempted
from c ustoms i mport duties and t axes f or a period o f 2 4 ( twenty-four) months, from 1
January 2 024_
3_ Equipment and m aterials i ntended f or l ivestock, f isheries a nd t he d evelopment o f f ish
farming shall b e e xempted f rom c ustoms import d uties a nd t axes f or a p eriod o f 2 4 ( twenty-
four) m onths, f rom 1 J anuary 2024.
PRESIDE
PR OLD 2
ERA
LEGISLATIVE AND R ULES
v,cL
STATUTORY AFFAt"S
EXPENSIVE LF4
Cl=D'lllr111,t- - -


4. T he lists o f goods r eferred t o in paragraphs , 1, 2 a nd 3 above, e xcluding t hose
manufactured l ocally, shall b e e stablished by an instrument o f the M inister of Finance,
after c onsultation w ith t he relevant m inistries a nd stakeholders in t he s ectors
concerned.
5. \ Nhere the e quipment a nd m aterials r eferred to in p aragraph 1 above a re intended
for commercial r esale b y the importer, he/she latter shall b e r equired, in a ccordance
with the provisions of A rticle 333 o f the CEMAC C ustoms C ode, to sign an agreement
with the C ustoms A dministration, t hrough w hich he u ndertakes to reflect s uch
exemption i n the final selling p rice o f t he energy o r s uch g oods t o the c onsumer.
6. R e-exportation of t he g oods r eferred t o i n p aragraphs 1 and 2 a bove s hall r emain
subject t o p rier payment o f c ustoms d uties and taxes not p aid on e ntry into the n ational
territory.
SECTION SIX: S upport to t he automobile i ndustry
1. V ehicle parts and- c omponents i mported by car manufacturing and assembly
companies s hall b e granted a 50% r eduction i n t heir taxable import v alue for a p eriod
of 1 0 ( ten) y ears, f rom 1 J anuary 2 024.
2. T he r eduction r eferred t o i n Section S ix ( 1 ) shall b e r eserved for v ehicle
manufacturing a nd a ssembly companies that h ave s igned a n a greement w ith the
Customs A dministration w hereby they u ndertake to transfer the e ffects o f such f acility
to c onsumers, a nd t o c omply w ith t he commitments arising from their i nvestment
projecwt. ww.prc.cm
SECTION SEVEN: Payment o f the a d valorem e xcise duty on s ome imported goods
The u ndermentioned i mported g oods s hall b e s ubject to ad v alorem excise d uty a s follows:
PRESIDENCY O F THE R
PRESIDENCY
SE
SERVED
AND
IRSCAROI I EE C ON.
AND
TRUE C
3


Description Custom R ates Rate
Cereal-based p roducts ( e.g. corn f lakes) and f ood 1904.10.00.000 preparations obtained f rom cereal f lakes and
5%
1904.20.00.000 1507.90.00.000 1508.90.00.000 1509. 1510.90.00.000 1 511.90.00.000 1512.19.00.000
1512.29.00.000 I
1513.19.00.000
Refined vegetable oils 12.5 %
1513.29.00.000
1514.19.00.000
1514.99.00.000
1515.19.00.000
1515.29.00.000
1515.30.00.000
1515.50.00.000
1515.90.00.000
1516.20.00.000
lndustrial sausage
excluding giblets,
which a re already
1602. 2 0.10.000
subject t o excise d utv
Cocoa beans, including those intended for use as r aw m aterials Doçi o r c at food Charcoal 12,5 %
-
1801.
12.5%
2309.10.00.000 12.5%
4402. 12.5%
4421.20.00.000 a nd
25%
Wooden coffins a nd o ther wood p roducts
4421.99.00.900
9403.10.00.000
Meta!w fumiture and f iwttings u sed in owffices .prc.cm25%
SECTION E IGHT: G raduai i ncrease in t axation on certain g oods a s part of i mport substitution
With t he e xception o f rice f or general consumption u nder t ariff subheadings
1006.10.10.000 t o 1 006.40.00.000, w hich s hall remain s ubject to customs i mport d uty
at t he r educed rate of 5 % provided f or i n A rticle 2 o f the F inance L aw f or t he 2 017
financial year, r ice known as "parboiled r ice" a nd "perfumed r ice", w hich s hall be
classified u nder specific t ariff s ubheadings 1 006. 30.90.200 a nd 1006.30.90.300, s hall
be s ubject t o t he s tandard rate of t he Common External T ariff provided for i n t he
Customs T ariff a s from 1 J anuary 2 024.
SECTION N INE: T axation on rough timber e xport
As an a mendment t o t he provisions o f Section Ten 1 ( c) o f the F inance L aw for t he 2 023
financial year, the r ate of e xit duty applicable t o rough t imber a nd similar t imber i s fixed
at 7 5% of the F OB value of t he v olume of t he s pecies. The r ate s hall remain f ixed at
60% a t the e ntry o f s uch t imber i nto i ndustrial f ree p oints.
SECTION TEN: C ustoms l imitation p eriods
1. P ursuant t o t he p rovisions o f Articles 3 98 and 3 99 of the C EMAC C ustoms Code,
the l imitation p eriod f or d eclarations o f release for c onsumption a s w ell a s f or d etailed
declarations of d ischarge o f d irect clearance t enders and s uspensive a nd economic
regimes s hall be t hree y ears.
PR E SIOELNf CE o e 'ÿÿ-
r-.r--rwa(cid:127)-(cid:127) (cid:127)-(cid:127)(cid:127)-
PRESSURE M
s
THIS 4
AND


2. The period r eferred to i n p aragraph 1 above s hall become thirty yéars for d irect
clearance t enders a nd d eclarations for t he p lacing of g oods u nder s uspensive a nd
economic r egimes w hich h ave n ot y et been d ischarged.
3. The thirty-year l imitation p eriod referred t o in paragraph 2 a bove shall apply
generally t o a ll c ustoms o perations r elating t o foreign t rade w here the C ustoms
Administration w as not in a position t o know of the e xistence o f its c laim to c ustoms
duties a nd t axes at the t ime w hen t he s aid d uties a nd taxes s hould have been paid.
SECTION E LEVEN: Information o n transport d ocuments
1. Pursuant t o the provisions o f Section 117, 1 22 and 124 of the C EMAC C ustoms
Code, s hipping companies, c onsignees, i nland c arriers a nd the captains and operators
of vessels, a ircraft and any o ther means o f transport shall be bound to indicate, on the
transport documents they s ubmit t o customs o ffices, the c ommercial d escription and
the tariff t ype o f the goods they a re transporting, as well a s the year o f first entry i nto
service, in c ase o f vehicles.
2. Any breach o f the o bligation r eferred t o in paragraph 1 a bove shall be tantamount
to failure to register, d eemed to be a s econd-class o ffence, a nd punishable by the
penalties s et o ut in A rticle 4 65 of t he CEMAC C ustoms Code.
SECTION T WELVE: C onversion r ate a pplicable w hen d ischarging direct c learance
The currency c onversion r ate applicable for t he settling o f direct removal submissions
www.prc.cm
through d etail d eclarations o f release f or c onsumption shall be that used w hen t he s aid
facility was granted.
SECTION T HIRTEEN: Proof of o rigin o f currency a nd t he tax s tatus o f holder a t
border crossings
1. At b order c rassings, n atural p ersans s hall be required t o d eclare to. the competent
customs s ervices, s ums i n c ash, i n b oth foreign c urrency and CFA f rancs, in excess o f
CFAF f ive million, i n a ccordance w ith the p rovisions o f Article 7 8 of Regulation N o.
02/18/CEMEC/UMAC/CM of 2 1 Deœmber 2 018 on foreign e xchange regulations i n
the CEMAC. T hey m ust a lso s how proof o f the l awful o rigin of t he said f unds.
2. The documents t o be provided t o justify t he origin of t he funds s hall be indicated by
a separate instrument o f the Minister i n c harge o f Finance.
3. ln t he event o f failure t o produce the c onvincing s upporting d ocuments r eferred t o
in p aragraphs 1 and 2 a bove, the s aid f unds s hall be seized by the c ustoms services,
in a ccordance with the seizure r eport, then c onfiscated b y decision o f t he Minister i n
charge o f Finance and p aid to the C entral Bank, a fter a utomatic d eduction o f the fines
imposed b y t he customs a uthorities.
SECTION F OURTEEN: O rganization o f mixed contrais
1. Where a posteriori customs c ontrais require s pecific technical s kills, the customs
authorities shall be authorized t o o rganize joint c ontrais w ith o ther g overnment services
and p ublic b odies.
2. The procedures f or carrying o ut s uch contrais s hall be laid d own i n separate .
instruments.
5


3. Where the s aid j oint c ontrais result i n customs f ines, the s taff of t he o ther
govemment s ervices a nd e ntities r eferred to in p aragraph 1 shall also r eceive
remuneration i n a ccordance w ith the customs r egulations i n force.
CHAPTERlWO
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE G ENERAL T AX C ODE:
SECTION FIFTEEN: The p rovisions o f A rticles 7, 8a, 8 b, 1 8, 18b, 18c, 1 8d, 18e, 1 8f, 1 8g,
18h, 1 8i, 1 9, 19a, 2 1 ( 2), 21 (3), 22 (3), 25, 3 3, 3 4, 3 5, 42a, 4 4 ( 6), 53, 56, 6 5 b is, 70, 8 5, 8 7, 88,
90, 92, 92a, 92b ( new), 9 3a A, 9 3b, 9 3j, 1 01, 1 03, 1 28 (6), 141a(new1142, 143,
149,225,226,231,239b,470a,543,546a,546b,546c,556, 556, 5 97,598, 598e, 601, M 1 , M 2 , M 2 a,
M 2 b, M 3 , M 6a, M 8 a, M 1 3, M 1 9a ( new),
M 4 1a, M 5 3, M 79, M 8 6, M 9 4a, M 9 4b, M 9 4c, M 1 04, M 1 04b, M 1 04b, M 1 21 (new), M 1 25,
M 1 45 of t he General T ax Code, a re amended and/or supplemented a s f ollows:
BOOK O NE
TAXES AND D UTIES
PARTY
DIRECT T AXES
www.CpHAPTErR c.cm
COMPANYTAX
DIVISION Ill
TAXABLE P ROFITS
Section 7: N et t axable profit s hall be e stablished a fter deduction o f a ll c harges d irectly
entailed by t he e xercise o f activities s ubject to a ssessment i n Cameroon, i n particular:
A - O verhead e xpenses
Ali types of overheads, p ersonnel and l abour expenses, expenses r elating t o p rem ises,
equipment a nd furniture, m iscellaneous and exceptional c osts, insurance p remiums,
liberalities, d onations and s ubsidies;
However, t he following e xpenses shall be t reated as f ollows:
1- S undry remuneration a nd p rovision of s ervices
(a) .................. · ····
(b) ...................... .
(c) ...................... .
d) S ubject t o international c onventions, t he f ollowing a re r ecognised as e xpenses,
provided t hey a re n ot e xaggerated:
(cid:127) Head office o verhead e xpenses f or operations carried out i n C ameroon a nd the
PRESIDENCY OF THE R -ÊP7':':'U::-:BL:-:-IQ -,
PRESIDENT
s 6


remuneration o f certain effective s ervices ( studics, t echnical, f inancial o r
accounting assistance) p rovided t o C amcroonian f irms b y f oreign or
Cameroonian n atural o r c orporate b odies.
On no account s hall t here b e a ccepted o n t his basis any sum exceeding
2.5% o f the taxable p rofit b efore deducting t he e xpenses c oncerned.
ln c ase o f a d eficit, t his p rovision s hall a pply t o t he results o f t he l ast f inancial
year n et p rescribed. H owever, f or c ompanies i n a continuous d eficit
situation a nd n ew c ompanies i n a deficit s ituation, t he l imitation s hall
apply t o turnover a t the r ate o f 1%. If t here is n o t urnover, t he b asis f or
calculating t he c ap s hall be the t otal amount of annual expenses
incurred b y the c ompany.
The r est s hall remain u nchanged.
C- A ctual t osses
The f ollowing s hall b e deductible f rom p rofits:
- d uly e stablished a ctual l asses o n fixed or realisable a ssets, w ith t he exception o f:
(cid:127) losses due t o m isappropriation by a shareholder o r a c ompany manager, or where t he
misappropriation is a ttributable to negligence o n t he p art of managers;
(cid:127) lwosses d uew to t he t ranwsfer of t he. l iabpilities orf the cd issolv.ed c companmy t o the
acquiring company, i n t he event of a c hange o f activities following r estructuring;
··· .. ...... . ... --- ... -- · . .. -·· ... --- ..
... ... ...
. ... ..
- l osses d ue t o damage duly established a nd validated i n t he presence of a taxation
officer w ith a t least t he r ank o f controller, u nder t he c onditions l aid d own i n t he T ax
Procedures M anual, p rovided that such l osses are not the r esult o f negligence o r
manifest r ecklessness o n t he part of the t axpayer, a s · established b y the
cornpetent a uthorities o r bodies.
The r est s hall r emain u nchanged.
Section 8 a : ( 1) T he charges r eferred t o i n S ection 7 above o f a value e qual t o o r above
CFAF 1 00 o oo ( one hundred t housand) p er transaction s hall n ot b e d eductible when p aid
in cash.
(2) The f ollowing s hall a lso be non-deductible:
- e xpenses j ustified b y i nvoiœs t hat do n et include a Single Identification N umber,
with t he e xception o f invoices f rom f oreign s uppliers;
- e xpenses j ustified by invoices i ssued o utside t he t ax authorities's
electronic i nvoicing monitoring s ystem;
- e xpenses r elating t o all types o f remuneration p aid to s elf-employed
professionals p ractising i n b reach of t he regulations i n f orce governing their
respective p rofessions;
PRESIDENCPY R DESI
7


- expenses r elating to a ll types o f r emuneration paid t o t axpayers w ho, on
the d ate o f t he transaction, are n ot o n the tax a uthorities' l ist o f a ctive
taxpayers.
Section 8 b (new): ( 1) C harges and all t ypes o f e muneration, r ecorded by a natural o r legal
person d omiciled o r e stablished i n Cameroon a nd relating t o t ransactions with n atural o r legal
persans residing o r e stablished i n a territory o r state c onsidered to b e a tax haven, shall n ot be
deductible f or the p urposes o f determining c orporate t ax or persona! i ncarne t ax in Cameroon.
(2) ........................................................................................................... .
(3) A t ax h aven s hall b e a State or t erritory whose incarne t ax rate f or i ndividuals o r
legal entities i s below one third o f that applied in Cameroon, o r a State o r territory
considered a s non-cooperative with r espect t o t ransparency and information exchange
for tax p urposes by the international b odies responsible f or p romoting
transparency a nd information exchange for tax p urposes.
DIVISION V II
OBLIGATIONS O F TAXPAYERS
Sectiwon 18: ( 1) wC oncerninwg the asse.ssmpent of thris t axc, taxpa.yersc are e xmpected to
subm i t a d eclaration o f r evenue d erived f rom their b usiness venture du r ing the p eriod s erving as
tax b ase no l ater than:
- 15 M arch f or t axpayers falling u nder the entity responsible f or the
management of large-scale e ntrerprises;
- 1 5 A pril for taxpayers f alling under medium-size t axation centres a nd
specialised t ax centres;
- 1 5 M ay f or t axpayers falling u nder divisional taxation c entres.
The d eclaration s hall b e p resented i n conformity with t he OHADA accounting system.
The r est s hall r emain u nchanged.
Section 18 b : ( 1) E nterprises f alling under the e ntity r esponsible f or t he management o f l arge-
scale e nterprises that a re controlled by or which c ontrol o ther enterprises w ithin t he m eaning of
section 1 9a o f this code s hall b e required to m ake an a nnual declaration on t ransfer pricing by
electronic m eans, i n accordance with t he model established by t he a dministration, w ithin t he
period p rovided f or in section 1 6 of this C ode.
(2) T he declaration referred to in the preceding s ubsection s hall include notably:
a. General i nformation o n t he group o f associated e nterprises, i ncluding:
i. . ..... ........ . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ..
PRÿSIOE ,
8
AND
1CE
1:&t ME
C oaRTll'IED,TRUE and


ii. . ......................................................................................................
'
iii. . .......................................................................................................
,
iv . . a list o f t he intangible a ssets held b y the g roup a nd used b y the r eporting e nterprise, a s
well a s the corporate n ame of t he c ompany t hat owns o r co-owns t he a ssets and it' s
state o r territory o f r esidenœ f or tax p urposes;
v. t he n ature o f the r elationship with the a ffiliated e nterprise.
b. Specific i nformation about t he reporting enterprise, i ncluding:
i. a description of t he activity c arried o ut, including t he c hanges m ade in t he
course o f t he financial y ear;
ii. a summary statement of t ransactions w ith a ffiliated e nterprises within t he
meaning o f s ect 1 9 a o f t his code. This statement shall i nclude t he n ature and
the a mount of t he transactions, t he c orporate name a nd state o r territory of
residence o f t he a ffiliated e nterprises conœrned by the t ransactions and the
beneficial o wners o f t he related payments f or t ax p urposes, t he t ransfer pricing
method applied a nd t he changes m ade in t he c ourse of the f inancial year;
iii. a statement of l oans a nd b orrowings contracted w ith a ffiliated e nterprises within
the meaning of section 1 9 a o f t his code;
www.prc.cm
iv. a summary statement o f t ransactions carried o ut w ith a ffiliated e nterprises
within the meaning o f s ect 1 9a o f t his c ode w ithout a c ounterpart c ontribution o r
with a n on-monetary c ounterpart c ontribution;
v. a summary s tatement of t ransactions carried out w ith a ssociated e nterprises w ithi n t he
meaning of Article 19 a o f t his Code, w hich are t he subject of an a dvance transfer
pricing agreement o r a tax r escript concluded b etween t he a ssociated e nterprise
concerned b y t he transaction a nd the t ax a uthorities of another S tate o r territory.
(3) Failure t o file t he a nnual p ricing declaration w ithin t he p rescribed t ime limit,
or f iling a n i ncomplete or n on-compliant d eclaration s hall b e p unished with a
fixed f ine as p rovided for in Article M 1 04 (2) of t he T ax P rocedures M anual.
Section 18 c: (1) A ny e nterprise established i n Cameroon shall be r equired to f ile, w ithin
twelve ( 12) months f ollowing the c lose o f t he t ax year, b y e lectronic m eans, a c ountry-by-
country r eport, u sing a f ormat established b y t he t ax authorities, i ncluding the c ountry-
by-country breakdown o f p rofits of the multinational e nterprise group t o w hich it belongs,
and tax and a ccounting d ata a s well as i nformation on the p lace w here the a ctivities of
the e nterprises i n the group a re c arried o ut, w here:
a. i t d irectly or i ndirectly owns s hares i n o ne o r more enterprises s uch t hat it is
required t o p repare c onsolidated financial s tatements i n accordance w ith
applicable a ccounting l egislation, or would be r equired to d o so i f its s hares
were l isted o n t he C entral A frican S tock E xchange ( BVMAC);
9


b. i t h as tax-exclusive annual c onsolidated sales of at least CFAF 492 000 0 00
000 ( four h undred and n inety-two billion) f or t he financial y ear preceding t hat t o
which t he d eclaration r elates;
c. n o o ther e nterprise d irectly o r i ndirectly o wns s hares in the aforementioned
enterprise w ithin the m eaning of p oint (a) of this paragraph.
(2) Any e nterprise e stablished i n C ameroon meeting o ne of the conditions below
shall a lso b e r equired to f ile t tie report p rovided f or in this Section within t he
time l imit a nd in accordance w ith t he procedures a nd format referred to above:
a. i t i s d irectly o r i ndirectly o wned by an enterprise established in a S tate
which d oes n ot require t he filing o f a c ountry-by-country r eport, but w hich would
be r equired to f ile s uch a r eport i f i t were established i n Cameroon; o r (cid:127)
b. i t i s directly o r i ndirectly o wned by an enterprie established i n a State
which i s not o n t he l ist provided f or i n paragraph 8 of t his Article b ut with w hich Cameroon h as c oncluded a n
agreement f or the exchange o f information o n t ax m atters.
(3) Any e nterprise e stablished i n Cameroon directly or i ndirectly o wned by an
enterprise e stablished i n a State i ncluded in the list provided f or i n Section 18c
(8), which i s required to f ile a c ountry-by-country r eport u nder the legislation i n
force i n t hat S tate or w hich w ould b e required to file such a r eport if it were
established i n Cameroon, shall a lso b e required to file the report p rovided f or i n
Sectiwon 18c w hwere i t is iwnformed b.y thpe tax aruthocrities o .f a cs ystemmic f ailure o f
the S tate o f t ax r esidency of t he c ompany w hich directly or i ndirectly o wns i t.
(4) A n enterprise e stablished in C ameroon, other than t he ultimate p arent entity
of a multinational e nterprise g roup, s hall not b e required to file the country-by-
cou,,,n try report in respect o f a t ax y ear in the event o f substitution f iling i n another
jurisdiction by t he m ultinational enterprise g roup, p rovided t hat t he following
cumulative c onditions are m et for t hat tax y ear:
- t he j urisdiction of t ax r esidence o f the reporting entity r equires t he filing
of a c ountry-by-country report s imilar t o that p rovided f or i n this Section;
- t he j urisdiction o f t ax r esidence o f the reporting entity h as concluded a n
agreement authorizing t he automatic exchange o f country-by-country
reports with C ameroon which is in force o n the date o n which t he
country-by-country report i s d ue to be filed;
- t he j urisdiction o f t ax r esidence of the reporting entity h as not i nformed
Cameroon of a s ystemic failure;
- t he c ountry-by-country report i s exchanged by the jurisdiction o f tax
residence o f t he reporting e ntity w ith C ameroon;
- t he j urisdiction of t ax r esidence o f the reporting entity h as been i nformed
by t he c onstituent e ntity resident for t ax purposes i n its jurisdiction t hat
the latter h as b een d esignated by the multinational e nterprise group t o
file the country-by-country report o n its behalf;
PRESIDENCY O F
PRESIDE
10


- a n otification from t he c onstituent e ntity r esident f or t ax purposes in
Cameroon h as b een r eceived by t he t ax authorities, i ndicating the
identity a nd jurisdiction of tax residence o f the r eporting e ntity.
(5) Where t wo or m ore e nterprises e stablished i n C ameroon belonging to the
same m ultinational e nterprise g roup meet o ne or m ore o f the conditions r eferred
to in S ection S c ( 2) a nd (3) above, one o f them may b e d esignated by t he
multinational e nterprise g roup t o f ile the c ountry-by-country report provided f or
in this Section, subject to i nforming t he tax authorities t hat s uch f iling seeks t o
fulfil t he f iling obligation imposed on a ll the e nterprises o f this multinational
enterprise g roup e stablished in Cameroon.
(6) The content o f t he country-by-country report provided f or i n t his a rticle s hall
be determined b y o rder o f t he M inister in c harge o f finance.
(7) The country-by-country r eport provided f or i n t his Section m ay b e e xchanged
automatically w ith States o r t erritories w hich h ave c oncluded a n a greement t o
this effect w ith Cameroon.
(8) The list of S tates w hich have c oncluded an a greement w ith C ameroon
authorizing t he a utomatic e xchange of the c ountry-by-country report provided
for in this Section shall b e d etermined b y o rder of the M inister in. c harge o f
finance.
(9) Failure t o f ile, o r i ncomplete or i naccurate f iling of the country-by-country
report within the s tipulated period s hall be p unished with a f ixed f ine as p rovided
www.prc.cm
for i n Section M 104 (2) of t he M TP.
Section 1 8 d : ( 1) Financial i nstitutions a nd s imilar b odies, including banks and
financial e stablishments, a s w ell a s i nsurance and r einsurance c ompanies, s hall
be r equired to i dentify t he t ax residence of all f inancial a ccount holders. T hey
must a lso identify, in the required m anner, t he tax residence o f the n atural
persons w ho c ontrol t hese a ccounts, w here applicable.
(2) Financial i nstitutions a nd s imilar bodies s hall disclose t o the t ax authorities,
by m eans o f a report t hat c onforms t o the m odel p rescribed b y t he tax
authorities, a ll the i nformation r equired for t he i mplementation o f conventions
concluded b y C ameroon allowing a utomatic e xchange o f information o n
financial a ccounts for t ax purposes. l hey m ust also r eport any lack o f
information.
The report s hall c ontain, in particular, i nformation r elating to the i dentification of
the holders o f f inancial a ccounts a nd, where applicable, t hat o f the i ndividuals
who c ontrol them, a s w ell as f inancial i nformation r elating t o these a ccounts,
including i ncome from m ovable c apital, account balances, t he surrender v alue
of insurance and annuity c ontracts, capitalisation b onds or contracts a nd similar
investments, a nd the p roceeds of s ales o r redemptions o f financial a ssets.
(3) Financial i nstitutions s hall b e r equired t o keep records of actions taken t o
meet t he obligations referred t o i n t his S ection, a s well as the s upporting
documents, s elf-certifications a nd o ther e vidence used f or t his p urpose, f or a
period o f 5 ( five) y ears f ollowing t he end o f the p eriod during w hich t hey must
provide t he information required.
PRESIDENCY O F
PRESIDE
11
AFFAIRS IRE
VICE
C IEE c
_ME
--.;..;..;.:..:..:=-!_!AU


Section 18 e: As f rom 1 January 2 025, n atural persons o r entities opening f inancial
I'
accounts w ith financial i nstitutions s hall be r equired t o s ubmit a s elf(cid:127) certification
establishing t heir t ax r esidence and, w here applicable, t he t ax r esidence o f the
natural p ersons c ontrolling t hem.
Section 18 f: (1) W here a person establishes a m echanism o r e ngages in a p ractice
the m ain purpose o r o ne of the m ain p urposes o f w hich may r easonably b e
considered t o b e to e vade an obligation imposed by t he p rovisions o f S ections 1 8e
and 1 8g a bove or their i mplementing i nstruments, s uch p rovisions s hall apply a s i f
the p erson had not e stablished t he m echanism o r engaged in t he p ractice.
(2) T he n otion o f " mechanism" i s d efined as a ny a rrangement, contract, p ractice,
transaction or s eries of transactions, i n w hatever form, h aving one o r more
principal objectives, o ne o r m ore o f w hich i s t o avoid o ne o f t he o bligations
imposed by t he p rovisions o f S ections 18f a nd 1 8g a bove or t heir implementing
instruments.
Section 18 g: ( 1) I nformation c ollected b y t he t ax a uthorities from t he b odies r eferred
to i n Section 1 8 d a bove m ay be d isclosed to t he t ax a uthorities of c ountries t hat
have concluded a greements w ith Cameroon a llowing a utomatic e xchange of
information o n f inancial accounts f or t ax p urposes.
(2) I nformation s hall b e disclosed in a ccordance with the c onditions l aid d own
in the a greements concluded w ith the countries c oncerned.
www.prc.cm
Section 18 h: ( 1) f ailure to c omply with the i dentification a nd r eporting o bligations
set out in Sections 18 d and 18 e shall be p unishable by a f ine o f FCFA 5 m illion p er
account. S uch p enalty shall a lso apply t o late, i ncomplete, i nsufficient o r e rroneous
reporting.
(2) N atural p ersons o r e ntities who fail t o p rovide f inancial institutions w ith the
self-certification p rovided f or in S ection 18e shall be l iable to a f ine o f F CFA 1
million p er account h older. T he d eliberate s elf-certification o f erroneous
information b y an account holder or a n atural person controlling t he a ccount
holder c onstitutes f orgery, b e p unishable b y t he p enalties p rovided for i n the
Criminal C ode.
(3) F ailure t o k eep t he i nformation and d ocuments p rovided f or i n A rticle 1 8d
shall b e p unishable b y a fine of F CFA 1 m illion p er year and p er account subject
to r eporting. F ailure t o c omply with the r etention period provided f or i n S ection
18 d s hall b e t antamount to failure t o keep records.
Section 1 8 i: The p rocedures f or implementing t he a utomatic e xchange o f information
provided for i n S ections 1 8 d e t s eq. o f this C ode s hall be l aid d own b y r egulation.
DIVISION VIII
ASSESSMENT
Section 19: ( 1) F or t he a ssessment o f t he c ompany tax p ayable b y companies which are
controlled b y, or w hich c ontrol an u ndertaking e stablished in o r outside C ameroon within
the m eaning o f Section 1 9 a of t his c ode, the profits indirectly t ransferred t o t he latter b y
increasing o r reducing t he purchase or s elling p rice, or b y any o ther means,
12
PR A.
RE.P
-HER
TGENe ENTAIRc
ISUf.1f e r Aff"rt-c"'
1 - - - - --


shall b e i ncorporated i n t he r esults of such e nterprises. T he profits indirectly transferred
shall b e a ssessed b y comparism with t hose that w ould have b een r ealised i n t he absence
of dependency or contrai.
(2) The condition o f dependency o r control referred to.in S ection 19(1) s hall not be
required w hen the t ransfer t akes p lace with e nterprises:
- established o r resident i n a State o r territory considered a s a tax h aven w ithin the
meaning o f Section 8 b (new) of this Code;
- or subject t o a preferential tax regime.
Enterprises s hall b e considered t o be subject t a a preferential t ax r egime in a State o r
territory i f t hey are n ot t axable therein, o r if their i ncome tax i s l ess than half t hat which
they w ould h ave paid i n Cameroon they were domiciled o r established there.
(3) The provisions o f s ection 19 (1) a bove shall also a pply t o t ransactions w ith a ffiliated
enterprises within t he m eaning of section 1 9a b elow, e stablished i n C ameroon,
particularly where t he l atter a re b eneficiaries o f . a derogatory t ax
regime ..................... ÿ-- ........... ( deleted).
Section 19 a : Dependency or control relationships shall be deemed to e xist between two
enterprises:
1. where o ne h olds d irectly o r by proxy 25% o f t he share c apital o f t he other or
wactually ewxercises d wecision-ma.kingp p owersr i n t hce other.; or cm
Il. where bath are p laced, u nder the conditions defined in p oint ( a) above, u nder
the c ontrai o f t he same enterprise or persan.
DIVISION IX
PAYMENT
Section 2 1: ( 1) The c ompany tax s hall be paid o n the initiative of t he taxpayer not later
than t he 15th of the f ollowing m onth, i n accordance with t he terms below:
The rest shall r emain unchanged.
(2) The installment r eferred t o in S ection 2 1 (1) above s hall be deducted a t s ource b y
the p ublic accountants a nd p ersans of equivalent s tatus d uring t he settlement o f b ills
paid b y t he b udget of the State, r egional and l ocal authorities, p ublic a dministrative
establishments, p ublic o r semi-public corporations, non-profit organizations a s well
as private sector e nterprises, t he list of which shall be e stablished b y regulation.
The r est shall r emain u nchanged.
(3) The following s hall b e subject t o a withholding tax:
··················· ···· ··············· · ·· ······· ,
,..._
PRESIDENCY O F THE
................................................ Wÿÿ::...-7
, PRESSURES
s
FFAIRS C ÿRO !THIS 13
AND
IN IEE C Ot!_F - 1 ..
--ÿ----....... R_u_e_\,;_,1,a.._-'


················· ·······························
,
············································;
The f ollowing s hall not b e s ubject to a withholding tax:
....................... .........................
,
················································ '
- purchases made by registered i ndustrialists s ubject to a ctual earnings S ystem for
farms
................................................... ( deleted);
················································
,
················································ '
(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127) t
The r est s hall remain u nchanged.
DIVISION X
TAX P AYER O BLIGATIONS
Section 2 2: ( 1) For the p ayment o f t he t axes c ollected, i ndustrialists, importers, w holesalers,
semi-wholesalers a nd forestry c ompanies must:
www.prc.cm
The r est s hall remain u nchanged.
(3) Any w ithholding tax d educted in rsespect of income t ax o r withholding t ax
on purchases s hall g ive r ise t o t he issue of a w ithholding t ax certificate. S uch
certificate m ust be generated f rom the t ax a uthorities' c omputer s ystem.
CHAPTER I I
PERSONAL I NCOME T AX
DIVISION 1:
GENERAL P ROVISIONS
SUB-DIVISION 1
TAXABLE P ERSONS
Section 25: S ubject t o t he p rovisions of i nternational c onventions a nd t hose o f S ection 27 below,
the P ersona! I ncarne Tax shall be payable by a ny n atural p ersans whase t ax r esidence i s in
Cameroon o n a ccount o f a ll t heir g lobal i ncarne
The r est s hall r emain u nchanged.
PRESIDENCY O F THE KING
PRESIDENT
SE
SERV ÿ""'" AND
ICE
ME
PY
14


DIVISION The
BASIS OF ASSESSMENT
OF THE P ERSONAL INCOME T AX
SUS-DIVISION 1
SALARIES, WAGES, PENSIONS A ND L IFE ANNUITIES
li -DETERMINATION OF T HE T AX BASE
Section 33= (1) B enefits in kind s hall be valued a ccording t o t he f ollowing scale, applicable to the g ross
taxable wage:
..................
'
..................
,
..................
,
.. . ... . .. ....... ... ,
..................
'
..................
'
- t elephone .... 5 % ;
- fuel... 1 0 % ;
www.prc.cm
- security guard 5 % ;
.. i nternet ...... 5 % .
Benefits i n k ind n ot l isted i n p aragraph 1 a bove s hall be valued at t heir a ctual c ost.
(2) A ny c ash a llowance representing benefits i n k ind shall b e i ncluded in t he b asis o f
assessment f or its actual amount, unless t hey a re specifically exempted b y a contrary
provision.
Section 34: ( 1) T he n et taxable i ncarne shall b e determined b y deducting from the g ross a mount paid
and t he b enefits in kind o r c ash granted, t he business expenses calculated at a fixed r ate of 3 0%, a s
well as c ontributions paid to the S tate and t he National Social lnsurance F und ( NSIF) for c ompulsory
retirement.
(2) The a mount resulting f rom the application o f t he fixed rate provided f or i n
paragraph 1 a bove s hall b e capped at FCFA 4 800 0 00 ( four m illion eight h undred
thousand) p er year.
SUB-DIVISION The
INCOME F ROM S TOCKS AND S HARES
1 - TAXABLE I NCOME
Section 35: T he f ollowing c apital s hall be taxed as incarne from stocks a nd shares
PRESSURE 15
PRE
ATIF ET AND
l'tEGL mHlffi:Hl'Îti\ .oRY A ff AIRS CARO l D ICE
DTICICC ... n .111: and


(1507) proceeds from s hares, s tocks a nd
similar incarne;
(b) incarne f rom b onds;
(c) i ncarne f rom a ssets, d eposits, s urety b onds a nd current accounts;
(1507) profits f rom t he t ransfer o f s hares, bonds a nd other k inds o f s hares
(1507) (e)income from d igital a ssets.
A- Proceeds f rom s tocks a nd s hares income c onsidered a s such
The rest s hall remain unchanged.
E. l ncome from d igital assets.
Section 4 2 a : T he methods o f t axation of income from digital a ssets s hall b e
laid d own b y a separate instrument b y the M inister in charge of f inance.
Ill. A SCERTAINMENT O F T AXABLE BASIS
Section 44: Taxable income shall b e assessed i n respect of
1) .......... ...... .
2)
www.prc.cm
3) ................ .
4) ................ .
5) ... ......... ·····
(6) I ncarne f rom t he i ndirect transfers referred to i n Section 4 2 above, t hrough the
capital g ain o btained from t he t ransfer of t he shares o f t he foreign e ntity to t he
Cameroonian c ompany's capital.
Recorded g ains o r t osses for e ach transfer operation d one d uring the financial
year shall be a ssessed by the differential b etween the transfer p rice of t he
securities concerned and t heir p urchase p riœ o r their grant v alue, in case of
acquisition of such securities during t he incorporation o f a c ompany o r when
increasing the company's capital. The amount t o be t aken i nto a ccount as
transfer p rice i n o rder t o determine t he g ain o r less s hall, u nder no
circumstance, b e below the v alue o f t he v alues t ransferred.
ln the event of net o verall l asses recorded in a f inancial year, such l osses s hall
be offset b y any n et overall p rofits r ecorded in the next f our f inancial years.
PRESION OF THE
PRESIDE NC
SE AND
FAIRS CAROi
· WITH, AND
STREET
16


SUS-DIVISION V
PROFITS F ROM AGRICUL TUE
1- TAXABLE INCOME
Section 5 3: I ncarne earned by f armers, s hare-croppers, smallholders, ( deleted) or by
the actual o wners o f agricultural u ndertakings shall b e deemed to b e profits f rom
agriculture f or t he a ssessment o f persona! incarne tax.
SUS-DIVISION VI
PROFITS F ROM N ON-COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES
1- TAXABLE I NCOME
Section 5 6: ( 1) Earnings f rom liberal professions, p ublic offices a nd trusts held by
persons without c ommercial status, f rom non-salaried income o f sportsmen a nd artists,
and f rom ail operations, gainful a ctivities and sources of gain u nconnected w ith any
other category of profit o r income s hall b e deemed t o be non-commercial earnings o r
earnings considered a s s uch.
(2) P rofits s hall n otably comprise:
(a) income f rom s tock-exchange o perations performed b y individuals;
(b) ......................................... ;
www.prc.cm
(h) i ncome generated o n digital platforms b y i ndividualswho sell goods, p rovide
services or e xchange o r s hare goods on s uch p latforms.
SUS-DIVISION VII
PROVISIONS COMMON T O HANDICRAFT, I NDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL,
AGRICUL TURAL A ND NON-COMMERCIAL P ROFITS
II- CALCULATION OF P ROFITS O F T AXPAYERS A SSESSED
UNDER T HE A CTUAL E ARNINGS SYSTEM
Section 65 a : W here, i n t he course of a financial y ear, a t axpayer r ealized an income
which, b y i ts nature, m ay n ot be m ade available to him a nnually and where t he a mount
of such s pecial incarne exœeds the average net i ncarnes on the b asis o f which t he
taxpayer was l iable t o the P ersona! l ncome T ax f or t he p revious t hree y ears, t he t ax
payable by t he person c onœrned shall be calculated b y a dding one quarter o f the n et
special income t o his net taxable incarne and multiplying t he a dditional t ax thus obtained
by f our ..
Where t he amount o f exceptional i ncome i s above the income t hreshold s ubject
to the m arginal rate o f p ersonal i ncome tax, the tax p ayable by t he t axpayer shall
be c alculated o n t he basis o f the o veràll n et taxable i ncome, p lus t he net
exceptional i ncome after a 2 5% r eduction.
The rest shall r emain u nchanged.
PRESIDENCE o
· P RES!
TAIR 17
T O RY AFFAIRS C
, SERVICE
TIFIEE C
AME
ED T RU py


DIVISION 111
TAX CALCULA T ION
Section 7 0: (1) l n the specific c ase o f incarne on s tocks a nd s hares, a 15% f iat r ate shall be a pplicable
to t axable i ncarne.
(2) However, t his r ate shall be f ixed at 1 0 % f or the non-commercial income and p rofits
referred to i n S ection 5 6 ( 2) d, e a nd f. l t shall be reduced t o 5 % f or the income
referred t o i n S ection 56 ( 2) h.
DIVISION VI
PAYMENT O F T AXES
SUB-DIVISION The
INCOME F ROM S ECURITIES
Section 8 5: (1) P ersona! i ncarne tax l evied on c apital gains from s ecurities calculated i n accordance
with Section 6 9 of t his C ode s hall b e deducted a t source by the persan p aying t he proceeds m entioned
in Sections 3 5 e t seq of t his C ode. T he d eduction thus m ade s hall give r ise t o t he issue of a
certificate of d eduction a t s ource which m ust b e generated f rom t he tax a uthorities's c omputer
system.
The r est shall r emain u nchanged.
SUS-DIVISION Ill:
www.prc.cm
REAL E STATE INCOME
Section 87: A 1 5% deduction at source s hall b e levied o n g ross r eal e state i ncarne c alculated i n
campliance w ith t he provisions o f section 48 .of t his C ode.
The d eduction a t s ource s hall be m ade e xclusively b y government s ervices and p ublic establishments,
carporate b odies and sole-proprietor b usiness assessed u nder the actual earnings system, simplified
system o r the n on-profit organization (NPO) system.
Rents p aid t o e nterprises a ssessed o n t he basis o f actual earnings and d epending solely o n t he
specialized m anagement units s hall be e xempt f rom t he deduction.
The withholding t ax i s levied exclusively b y p ublic administrations a nd e stablishments, legal e ntities a nd
sole p roprietorships subject t o the real i ncarne t ax r egime, the simplified t ax r egime o r t he regime f or non-
profit-making o rganisations ( NPOs).
Section 8 8: The deduction s hall be m ade b y t he person p aying t he rents w ho shall be r esponsible for
payment of t he said a mount t o his/her T axation Centre, n ot later than the 15th of t he month following
the actual payment o f the r ents.
The w ithholding t ax o n rent s hall g ive rise to t he issue of a withholding tax c ertificate w hich m ust
be g enerated f rom t he tax a uthorities's c omputer system.
Section 90: The c apital g ains referred to i n section 46 ( 2) shall b e subject t o a 5 % f iat r ate deducted b y
the notary for t he vendor. T he r ate shall b e increased to 1 0% w here the transaction is made in c ash.
However, t he b uyer may also pay the capital gains tax o n b ehalf o f the seller.
PRESIDENCE oe
18
PRESI
ETR RE
ORY AFFAIRS C ARO VICE
IFIEE C O ME
.


SUS-DIVISION I V:
HANDICRAFT, I NDUSTRIAL, C OMMERCIAL,
AGRICUL T URAL AND N ON-COMMERCIAL P ROFITS
Section 9 2: The i nstallments referred t o in S ection 9 1 above s hall be deducted a t s ource by
public a ccountants and p ersons of e quivalent s tatus d uring the s ettlement o f b ills p aid from t he
budget o f t he S tate, regional and l ocal authorities, public a dministrative e stablishments, p ublic o r
semi-public corporations a s well a s non-profit organizations a nd p rivate sector enterprises, t he
lists of w hich shall be established b y regulation.
The rest s hall remain u nchanged.
Section 9 2 a : A 5 % installment shall be deducted a t s ource b y the S tate, regional a nd l ocal
authorities, a dministrative public establishments, p ublic o r s emi-public c ompanies, private
enterprises a nd n on-profit o rganizations (NPOs) o n the f ees, commissions a nd e moluments
paid t o m embers o f l iberal professions, i rrespective o f . their legal f orm o r t ax system.
The rest shall r emain unchanged
Section 9 2 b (new). T he t ax d ue p ursuant to t he provisions o f S ection 5 6 (2) d, e, f shall be
deducted a t s ource b y the e ntity t hat makes the payment or the o perator o f the d igital platform.
www.prc.cm
The amount d educted shall b e paid not l ater than t he 1 5th of t he following m onth to t he taxation
office w ith jurisdiction.
The tax d ue i n accordance w ith t he p rovisions o f section 5 6 (2) d, e , f, h i s deducted a t s ource by
the e ntity m aking t he p ayment.
The s ums t hus d educted a re p aid b ack t o t he l ocal t ax o ffice b y the 15th o f the following m onth at t he
latest.
Section 9 3a A : T he d eductions made at source i n r espect o f the i ncarne t ax i nstalment
provided for in Sections 92, 9 2a, 9 2 b ( new), 9 3 and 9 3a g ive r ise to the i ssue of a d eduction
at source c ertificate w hich m ust b e g enerated f rom the t ax a uthorities's c omputer s ystem.
CHAPTER I ll
GENERAL AND C OMMON P ROVI-SIONS ON
COMPANY A ND PERSONAL I NCOME T AX
DIVISION 1:
TAXATION SYSTEMS
Section 9 3 t er: N atural o r legal p ersans shall b e assessed according t o t he following s ystÿms,
determined o n the b asis o f the t urnover realized:
··· ······ · ·· · ·· · ·· · ·· · ·· · ·· · ·· · ·· · ···· ·--pÿRÿEÿsÿ,oÿEÿNÿCÿEÿoÿe1LlAÿÿÿÿ!ÿÿ;ÿ
RECEIVER
RE
oOO O(cid:127)ÿ o o O O O Q O o O 0 0 0 0 0 0 o oo ooo ÿÿ0 oOo (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) )
tWICE
RME 19
PY


(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) 1
......................................
,
- Non-professional t axpayers.
Section 9 3h: ( 1) Non-professional t axpayers shall b e p ersons w ho r eceive only
income from salaries, wages, p ensions, l ife a nnuities and/or income f rom movable
capital a nd income from p roperty, and in g eneral any p assive i ncome.
(2) Subject to the exemptions provided for i n t his Code, p ersans under t he non-
professional t axpayer r egime shall be l iable to p ayment of the f ollowing t axes
for w hich t hey a re actual o r statutory t axpayers:
- in their capacity as a ctual taxpayer: persona! income t ax i n t he categories o f
salaries a nd wages and p roperty income, r egistration fees, t ax o n landed
property a nd t ax o n r eal estate wealth;
- in t heir c apacity a s statutory taxpayer: s pecial i ncome tax, s alary d eductions.
(3) Non-professional t axpayers s hall be r equired to f ile a summary a nnual r eturn
of t heir income i n accordance w ith the p rovisions o f S ection 7 4a o f t his C ode.
DIVISION I V
OBLIGATIONS O F BUSINESS OWNERS
www.prc.cm
Section 101: Before 1 5 M arch e ach year o r one m onth b efore departure f rom C ameroon of h is salaried
workers, e very b usiness owner s hall, using t he m odel provided b y the t ax authority, make an individual
return f or each w orker o n t he following s ums paid during t he p ast financial year: a ) .......................... ..
'
b) ............................
,
c) a list o f p urchases b y s upplier, showing t heir single i dentification n umber and
the a mount o f purchases f or t he financial y ear;
d) a l ist o f s ales b y c ustomer, indicating t heir single i dentification n umber and t he
amount o f s ales f or the f inancial y ear.
Section 103: Any i nfringement of t he p rovisions o f S ections 1 01 a nd 1 02 a bove shal,I give r ise to a f ine
of 5 % o f t he a mount not d eclared. S uch fine shall be recoverable i n t he s ame way a s the taxes s pecified
in the c hapters a bove.
The rest shall r emain u nchanged.
PRESIDENCY O F T HE REPUBLIC
ic-.-:71
PRESIOENCY OF
SECR
SERVICE .. .._..., .. "
THIS
L ME
and
20


PART H e
VALUE A DDED TAX A ND EXCISE D UTY
CHAPTER I
SCOPE O F APPLICATION
DIVISION Ill
EXEMPTIONS
Section 128: T he f ollowing shall b e exempted from V alue Added Tax:
(6) a - essential g oods l isted under A nnex 1 , notably:
. ........................................
(cid:127) '
(cid:127) .
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) . (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) 1
(cid:127)
. ........................................ '
(cid:127) . ... ..... .. .... .. ... .... ...... ... ... ..... .
b- The e xemption provided f or in p aragraph 6 (a) a bove s hall n ot apply t o the
following p roducts:
www.prc.cm
- p arboiled rice o f t ariff subheading 1006.30.90.200;
- p erfumed rice o f t ariff subheadirig 1 006.30.90.300;
- o rnamental f ish of t ariff subheadings 0301.11.00.000, 0 301.19.00.000;
- c hilled t rout of t ariff subheading 0302.11.00.000;
- f resh or c hilled s almon o f t ariff subheadings 0302.13.00.000, 0 302
.14.00.000, 0 302.19.00.000;
- l ivers and r oes of f ish of t ariff s ubheading 0302.91.00.000;
- f rozen s almon o f t ariff subheadings 0303.11.00.000, 0 303.12.00.000 a nd
0303.13.00.000;
- f rozen t rout o f t ariff s ubheadings 0303.14.00.000 a nd 0 303.19.00.000;
- l ivers, r oes, fins, h eads, t ails, swim b ladders a nd other o ffal of edible f ish of
tariff s ubheadings 0303.91.00.000, 0303.92.00.000 a nd 0303.99.00.000;
- J ivers a nd roes of f ish, d ried, smoked, salted o r in brine of tariff s ubheading
0305.20. 0 0. 0 00;
- s almon, dried, s alted or i n b rine o f t ariff s ubheading 0305.41.00.000;
- t rout, d ried, smoked, salted or i n brine of tariff s ubheading 0305.43 . 00.000;
- c od of tariff s ubheading 0 305.62.00.000.
PRESIDENT O F LAR . r ~ , · .. ~ . ..... .. - , (cid:127) ,
PRESIDE .. - ÿ··ÿÿ--::f'
0
RAI 21
S THREE GL
RY A FFAIRS THII S
L~=~~ ~
CARO ÿd::JÿÿÿÿEÿRrt'"TNlÿIEE C O
AND
IFIED T RUE


CHAPTER II
CALCULATION METHODS
DIVISION I ll
CALCULA TION
A-BASIS OFASSESSMENT
Section 141a ( new): ln t he specific c ase o f t he beverages l isted below, t he basis of assessment o f excise duty shall
be d etermined after a pplication of a n abatement of:
- 10% f or c arbonated b everages;
- 10% f or b eer with a n alcohol content of 5 .5 or less
.................................................................. ( deleted).
8-RATES
Section 142: ( 1) ...................................................................................... ;
(6) (a) The average r ate o f e xcise duty shall a pply t o:
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) J
.......................................... --- ......
'
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) J
www.prc.cm
............ ... ...... ... ... ... ... ............ ... ...
'
.............................. .....................
,,
- hair, wigs, w ool, b eards, eyebrows, e yelashes, locks and other t extile materials
imported f or t he m anufacture o f w igs o r similar articles o f hair of tariff headings
6703 t o 6704;
...................................................
'
(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) J
......... ..............................................
'
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) f
- refined vegetable o ils i mported u nder tariff s ubheadings 1507.90.00.000,
1508.90.00.000, 1 509, 1 510.90.00.000, 1511.90.00.000, 1 512.19.00.000,
1512.29. 0 0.000, 1 513.19.00.000, 1 513.29.00.000, 1 514.19.00.000,
1514.99.00.000, 1 515.19.00.000, 1 515.29.00.000, 1515.30.00.000,
1515.50.00.000, 1 515.90.00.000 a nd 1 516.20.00.000;
- imported c ocoa beans, i ncluding t hose intended f or use as r aw materials
of t ariff h eading 1801;
- imported d og or c at feed o f tariff s ubheading 2 309.10.00.000;
- imported c harcoal o f t ariff h eading 4402.
(b) The r educed r ate o f e xcise duty shall a pply t o:
PRESSURE
PRES
22
ATlf A REG IRE
ÿÿÿrï,ïirêÿmi (cid:127)- (cid:127)-- AFFAIRSCARO l ij ICE
l_!!.Çf>tif
--- AND


(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)....(cid:127)..(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)...................... '
.
. . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . '
.
(cid:127) (cid:127) ÿÿ ÿ (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) ÿÿ ÿ (cid:127) ÿ (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) ÿ ÿ (cid:127)(cid:127) ÿ (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) ÿ (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)a '
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)..(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127).(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127).................................. '
.
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127).(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)....(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)....(cid:127)(cid:127)..(cid:127).(cid:127)..........(cid:127)........ '
.
.......(cid:127)................(cid:127).(cid:127)........................ '
.
...........(cid:127)..............(cid:127)........................ ,
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)
J
- imported c ereal products ( corn flakes) a nd food p reparations o btained
from imported c ereal f lakes of tariff s ubheadings 1 904.10.00.000 a nd
1904.20.00.000.
The rest shall remain unchanged.
C - D EDUCTIONS
Section 1 43: (1) V alue A dded T ax u pstream o n t he price o f a taxable o peration shall be
deductible f rom t he tax applicable t o s uch t ransactions, as concerns r egistered t axable
subject a ssessed o n t he basis o f t he actual e arnings, in t he following manner:
www.prc.cm
(a) The Value A dded Tax w hich w as applied t o the p rice of a taxable t ransaction shall
be deductible during t he c orresponding month.
(b) To b e deductible, Value Added T ax s hould appear:
- o n a b ill duly i ssued v ia t he tax authority's e lectronic invoicing tracking s ystem b y a
registered supplier, entered in t he taxpayer's f ile a ctive at the time o f invoicing, who i s
assessed on the b asis o f a ctual earnings a nd b earing his s ingle i dentification n umber.
However, these conditions shall not a pply for s uppliers a broad;
The rest shall remain u nchanged.
(2) ...... ......................... .......... .
(3) ............ ...... ....................... .
(4) ......................................... .
Value A dded Tax d eductions at s ource shall b e m ade u pon 23roduction o f the certificate
of d eduction a t s ource i ssued by t he entity authorized t o deduct taxes a t source v ia the
tax a uthority's c omputer s ystem.
Any c ertificate o f d eduction a t source issued o utside t he t ax authority's c omputer
system s hall n ot give entitlement t o VAT d eduction.
PRESSURE D
PRESI
AND
ICE
ME
PY 23


CHAPTER I ll
RULES OF PROCEDURE
DIVISION 1
METHOD O F PAYMENT O F THE TAX
Section 1 49: (1) ..................................................... .
(2) F or suppliers to the S tate, r egional and l ocal a uthorities, a dministrative public
establishments a nd p ublic a nd semi-public e nterprises, and some p rivate sector
companies, the l ists of which a re d rawn u p by regulation, V alue Added Tax shall be
deducted at s ource during s ettlement of an i nvoice a nd transferred to t he tax office o r,
otherwise, to t he a ccounting office w ith territorial j urisdiction, u nder the same
conditions and time-limits a pplicable t o the other transactions. Such deductions s hall
concern b oth initial i nvoices a nd credit n otes r elating to c ommercial r eductions. T he
deduction t hus m ade s hall give rise to t he i ssuance o f a c ertificate of d eduction
at source w hich m ust b e generated from the t ax authority's c omputer s ystem.
The rest s hall remain u nchanged.
(4) N o a pplication f or refund o r offsetting o f value added t ax may b e s ubmitted b ased
on receipts of p ayments i n c ash.
www.prc.cm
They s hall be refundable:
- within a p eriod of three months to firms having a structural credit s tatus d ue to
deduction of t ax a t source.
Any c ertificate of deduction a t source i ssued o utside the tax authority's c omputer s ystem s hall not give
entitlement t o r efund.
The r est shall r emain u nchanged.
ANNEXES T O PART I l
ANNEX I l: LIST OF P RODUCTS S UBJECT T O EXCISE DUTY
Heading N o. Tariff description
···················· ····················· ·
...................... ...... ..... ....... .....
6703. to 6 704 Hair, wigs, w ool, b eards, eyebrows, e yelashes, locks and o ther t extile
materials i mported f or the m anufacture o f wigs o r s imilar articles of human
hair
.......................
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - .
.................. ... . ..... ...... ...... .....
·(cid:127)-:-:-:.-:ÿ:-=..,.."7
PRESIDENCY O F
PRESIDE
24
By F AIRS CARO ICE
IEE C O
AND
TRUE


4421.20.00.000 and
lmported Wooden coffins and o ther wooden a rticles
4421.99.00.900
9403.10.00.000 lmported M etal f urniture o f t he t ypes used i n offices
9403.40.00.000 lmported Wooden furniture o f t he t ypes u sed i n kitchens
9403.70.00.000 lmported Plastic furniture
1904.10.00.000 and lmported cereal-based products ( corn f lakes) and f ood p reparations
1904.20.00.000 obtained from imported c ereal f lakes
1507 . 90 00 000, 1509.20 00 l mported refined v egetable o ils 000,
15.09.20 00 000, 1 508.90 00
000, 1 509. 9 0 00 000, 1510.90
00 000, 1 511.90 0 0 0 00, 1512.19
00 000, 1 512.29 00 0 00, 1513.19
.
00 000, 1 513.29 00 0 00, 1514.19
00 000, 1 514.99 0 0 0 00, 1515.19
00 000, 1 515.29 0 0 0 00, 1515.30
00 000, 1 515.60 0 0 0 00, 1515.90
00 000;
I
I
1602.20.10.000 lmported l ndustrial s ausage, excluding giblets , which a re
already s ubject to e xcise duty at the r ate of 2 5 %
1801 lmported c ocoa beans, including t hose i ntended f or u se as r aw
materials
www.prc.cm
2309.10.00.000 lmported feed f or d ogs and c ats
4402 lmported c harcoal
0901.11.12.000 to 0 901.11.19; lmported c offee 0 90111 2 2
to 0 901.11.49.000 ; 09011.11.52.000
to 0 90112.00.000; 0901.21.00.000
0901.22.00.000;
2101 and
PART IV
SUNDRY T AXES A ND DUTIES
CHAPTER I ll
SPECIAL INCOME T AX
Section 225: ( 1) S ubject t o international t ax treaties, a s pecial tax is h ereby i nstituted o n
income paid t o n atural persons o r corporate bodies d omiciled o ut o f C ameroon, b y
natural persans or corporate b odies located i n C ameroon, the S tate or regional or local
authorities in respect of:
The r est shall remain u nchanged.
Section 2 26: l n o rder to be t axable, the a bove proceeds s hall b e t axable where they a re paid b y natural p ersons o r
corporate bodies l ocated in Cameroon, by the Sta.te o r r egional o r l ocal a uthorities to persons h aving no p ermanent
nor f ixed establishment in Cameroon, o r w here t hèy are factored as deductible c harges f or t he c alculation o f
PRESIOENC E PUBLI e PRES y OF 25
THE
REP LIC ECRETA NE Al.
LEGISLATIVE A ND REGULATORY
ISLATIYE
AND S TATUTORY AFF41RS CA l ÿOEX SERVICE
ÿftDIS: ren .. (cid:127)- -(cid:127)-- - .. __


the r esults o f t he payer. W here d eduction o f s uch p roceeds a s c harges i s not allowed, t hey shall
be c onsidered a s distributed p rofit a nd t axed accordingly.
PART IV
SPECIAL T AXATION
CHAPTER I
SPECIAL T AXON P ETROLEUM PRODUCTS
Section 231: The r ates o f the special t axon petroleum products shall b e a s f ollows:
(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) 1
- 60 f rancs per c ubic metre for n atural g as f or i ndustrial u se.
CHAPTER II
PROVISIONS RELATING T O THE M INING S ECTOR
Section 239b: ( 1) The f ixed charges for t he grant, r enewal o r transfer of all m ining titles, a nnual
area r oyalties, t he ad valorem tax, the extraction t ax on q uarry products and t he royalties on t he
production o f spring w ater, m inerai water and t hermos s pring w ater s hall b e p aid exclusively to
the c ompetent t ax collector.
However, t he a d valorem t ax on minerai s ubstances a nd t he corporate t ax payable by c ompanies
engagwed i n l ess owr s emi-mecwhanized non.-indpustrial m irning c may be .c olleccted in kmind by d educ tion
from t he g ross p roduction o f the said c ompanies. A n o rder of t he minister i n charge of finance
shall d etermine the conditions f or r ecording of collections i n k ind.
The m inister o f finance may, a s appropriate, a uthorize a ny b ody or e ntity i n charge of
supervising m ining a ctivities t o a ssist t he t ax authority in collecting i n kind t he a d v alorem
tax o n minerai substances a nd corporate tax.
The t erms a nd c onditions o f a pplication of t his authorization s hall b e l aid d own j ointly b y
the m inisters i n c harge of f inance and mines.
The r est s hall r emain u nchanged.
PART V I
REGISTRATION, STAMP DUTY AND T RUSTEESHIP
CHAPTERXIV
STAMP A ND S TAMP DUTY
DIVISION Ill
STAMP ON THE ISSUE OF S OME D OCUMENTS AND M ISCELLANEOUS I TEMS
G - SPECIFIC S TAMPS O N SOME D OCUMENTS
Section 4 70a: C ontentious a nd n on-contentious c laims, applications f or d eferment of. p ayment, applications f or c ompensation,
refund o r restitution o f taxes, a pplications f or _ _ P _R_eÿs --,oÿe ... N·c=-=-e -=-o=-:-::-: P RES
(cid:127) -ÿÿ-------.
26
ETR AND
FFAIRS C ARO ICE
IEE Q Q AND
_


tax incentives a nd r ebates, a pplications f or tax transactions a nd f or approvals or
authorizations o f a ny k ind s hall b e s ubject to a s pecific stamp duty.
SUB-PART It
NON-HARMONIZED L EGISLATION I N THE C EMAC ZONE
CHAPTER I
RATES O F REGISTRA T ION D UTIES
DIVISION 1
PROPORTIONAL DUTIES
Section 5 43: T he f ollowing s hall b e s ubject t o:
(a) t he h igh r ate o f 1 5%:
M i nstruments and transfers o f b usinesses p rovided for in S ection 341(1) o f t his
Code, with the exception o f n ew goods, w hich a re s ubject to t he r educed r ate o f
2% w hen the c onditions s et o ut i n the said paragraph a re
met ......................................................................... ( deleted).
(b) t he i ntermediate r ate o f 1 0%:
- instruments a nd transfers of u rban built-on e states;
- inwstruments wa nd transfewrs provided. for p in S ectiorn 341c ( 2) o f t.his C code, e xmcluding lease s
of b uildings i n r ural areas f or business purposes;
- t ransfers of u se of b usinesses and c ustomers;
- instruments a nd transfers of businesses p rovided for in S ection 341(1) of this Code,
excluding n ew goods, which a re s ubject t o the r educed r ate of 2% where t he c onditions
set out i n t he said paragraph a re m et.
(c) U nchanged.
(d) U nchanged.
(e) the s uper-reduced rate o f 1 %:
- instruments a nd transfers provided for i n Section 344 a bove. H owever, as regards
release o f m ortgages, the t ax calculated s hall b e r educed by t hree q uarters;
- notwithstanding t he provisions o f S ection 344 o f t his C ode, instruments and
transfers of property t o associations r ecognized as b eing of p ublic u tility and
duly a uthorized f aith-based b odies.
The rest shall remain unchanged.
DIVISION V
ADMINISTRATIVE E VALUATIONS
Section 546a: (1) Notwithstanding t he provisions of S ections 3 24 a nd 3 25 s upra, the
estimate t hat s erved a s b asis for t he l evying of p roportional, p rogressive o r digressive duty
on m ovable o r immovable property a ssigned i n o wnership, u sufruct o r possession shall
not b e lower t han that r esulting f rom implementation of t he official p rice l ist.
PRE 27
TGEN
LEGISLATIVE A ND TAIR
RY'AFFAIRS CAR SERVICE


· ln the specific case o f transfers resulting from i nheritance, d ivision, release f rom
joint ownership a nd g ifts inter vivos in t he direct line and b etween s pouses, the
value used as b asis for c alculating r egistration duty s hall be determined by
applying a discount of 50% t o t he value r esulting from applying t he official p rice
list.
The rest shall remain u nchanged.
DIVISION VI
SPLITTING OF D UTIES
Section 546b: N otwithstanding t he provisions of S ections 304, 3 12 a nd 3 13 o f t his C ode, t he
amount of the r egistration d uty for a l ong l ease m ay be split i nto as m any payments as there
are three-year p eriods in the t erm o f the lease.
Section 546c: (1) Where the p ayment o f d uties is split i nto installments, the registration
formality shall b e granted a s a nd w hen t he i nstallments a re paid and f or t he amount of e ach
installment.
(2) F ailure b y the t axpayer t o c omply with the terms and c onditions for payment
in installments shall i nvalidate the i nstallments g ranted and r ender t he a mount
of d uty still due immediately payable, without p rejudice to l ate payment p enalties
of an additional duty.
www.CHpAPTER IIrc.cm
STAMP D UTY R ATES
DIVISION T he
SPECIAL STAMP DUTY PAYABLE O N SOME DOCUMENTS A ND OTHER FEES
F- S TAMP O N T RANSPORT CONTRACTS
Section 556: S tamp on transport c ontracts shall be fixed a s f ollows:
1 ) ................................. ;
2) ·····--·----------------·-------- , .
3) CFAF 10 ooo per bill o f lading f or transport of g oods b y air.
Stamp duty on t ransport contracts shall be paid by t he t ransporter e xclusively a t the r evenue office o f
his o r her taxation centre. ln t he c ase of a ir transport contracts, the stamp d uty s hall be collected
by the express m ail c ompany.
SUS-PART I ll
UNHARMONIZED CODE IN CEMAC Z ONE
CHAPTERV
STAMP D UTY ON M OTOR V EHICLES
Section 598: T he stamp d uty on m otor vehicles shall be c ollected b y i nsuranœ companies a t the
time of s ubscribing t o a c ivil liability insurance p olicy.
PRESIDENCY D
PRES
28
AREA
ORY AFFAIRS (cid:127) SERVICE
IFEE C RME
D TRUE PY


lnsurance companies s hall c ollect the s tamp d uty o n m otorvehicles a t t he r ate r eferred to i n Section 5 97
above f rom the very first p ayment o f the i nsurance p remium d uring the y ear, b e i t partial or t otal p ayment.
Collection o f t he stamp d uty on m otor v ehicles s hall be s ubject t o t he issuance of a receipt by t he
insurance c ompany, g enerated by t he tax a uthority's c omputer system.
The rest shall remain unchanged.
Section 598a: U nder pain o f the f ine provided f or i n Section M 104 of t he M anual of T ax P rocedures,
insurance c ompanies shall b e required t o attach t o t heir a nnual return a file of t heir i ntermediaries
.
specifying t heir n ame or company n ame, t heir single i dentification n umber, t heir a ddress a nd l ocation.
Failure to issue a c ertificate o f p ayment o f the s tamp duty o n m otor vehicles in t he tax a uthority's
computer s ystem s hall b e l iable t o p ayment o f t he f ine provided for in S ection M 104(1) o f t he
Manual o f Tax P rocedures.
Section 601: F ailure to p roduce justification o f p ayment o f t he t amp duty o n m otor vehicles by presenting
a p ayment certificate o f t he s aid stamp d uty g enerated b y the t ax a uthority's computer s ystem t o t he
authorized c ontrol officiais s hall constitute a s econd-class o ffence, p unishable u nder S ection 3 62(b) o f t he
Penal C ode.
BOOK T WO
MANUAL OF T AX PROCEDURES
www.prc.cm
SINGLE CHAPTER
OBLIGATIONS OF T AXPAYERS
DIVISION 1
OBLIGATION TO F ILE R ETURNS
SUS-DIVISION 1
GENERAL P RINCIPLE
Section M 1 : A ny n atural o r legal person l iable, as a statutory o r a ctual taxpayer, t o p ayment o f a tax,
duty or l evy o r a n installment t hereof, b y v irtue of t he p rovisions of t he G eneral Tax C ode, m ust f ile an
application f or r egistration w ith t he c ompetent tax a uthority o f h is area, within 15 ( fifteen) w orking d ays
following t he start of his a ctivities, a nd a ttach t o s uch a pplication a site plan, t he s ubscription r eferences
of the public w ater o r electricity d istribution s ervice company, a s appropriate, t he t elephone number a nd a
valid e -mail a ddress.
After c ompletion of the r egistration procedure, a registration receipt stating t he t axpayer's s ingle
identification n umber, t ax system and r egistration centre shall be i ssued t o t he taxpayer b y t he t ax
authority.
The rest shall r emain unchanged.
Section M 2 : ( 1) Any natural person o r corporate l iable as a statutory t axpayer t o p ayment o f a tax, d uty
or l evy o r a n i nstallment t hereof, or designated t o e ffect d eduction a t s ource by virtue o f l aws a nd
regulations, s hall b e bound t o file returns, i ncluding t he S tatistical and F iscal Oeclaration ( DSF), u sing
official f orms supplied b y
PRESIDENT
PRE 29
ATIF ET
AIR
R G RT AFFAIRS
e R . CARO T ls:'lla: ,__,. ERVJCE


the C ameroonian t ax authority, along w ith m andatory annex documents, w ithin t he d eadlines
prescribed b y l aw.
(2) T he r eturns r eferred t o in p aragraph 1 above must b e f iled e lectronically. ln this
case, the g enerated tax assessment n otice s hall serve a s the b asis f or payment of t he
corresponding duties and t axes.
(3) H owever, e nterprises under t he j urisdiction o f a specialized management u nit s hall
be b ound t o f ile t heir tax r eturn and s tatistics e xclusively by using t he e lectronic
computer system set u p by t he t ax authority .
. . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . .. . .. . . .. . . . .. . .. . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . .-...... ( deleted).
Section M 2fal: (1) Notwithstanding t he provisions r elating to t he s ystem o f d eclaration, t he T
ax A uthority may s end to a ny natural o r l egal p erson l iable t o pay a tax, d uty o r levey a s per the
laws and r egulations in f orce, i n t he e vent o f a clear a bsence o r inadequacy o f a return, a pre-
completed r eturn of c ollected r evenue or any o ther t axable item, w ith the t ax a mount owed.
The rest s hall remain unchanged.
Section M 2b: . (1) Up-to-date t axpayers shall b e e ntered in the r egister o f a ctive t axpayers of
the G eneral Directorate o f Taxation.
Newly r egistered t axpayers s hall b e e ntered in the d atabase o f a ctive t axpayers effective from
the d ate o f f iling of t he f irst tax r eturn.
www.prc.cm
ln the e vent of f ailure to f ile r eturns b y a taxpayer over a period o f two consecutive m onths, the
latter s hall automatically be d eleted f rom the s aid d atabase. Automatic deletion shall take p lace
from the f irst failure to file a nnual r eturns f or the n on-professional t axpayer. S/he m ay be
reinserted t herein only a fter r egularizing h is/her t ax s ituation.
(2) N o professional t axpayer may c arry o ut i mport o r export t ransactions w ithout being
entered in the a ctive t axpayers' r egister o f t he G eneral Directorate of Taxation and
does n ot o wn a c ertificate of t ax compliance.
SUBDIVISION I I
NOTICE TO FILE R ETURN
Section M 3: Any taxpayer w ho faits t o f ile a return w ithin t he t ime-limit p rescribed by law shall
receive a l atter reminding him t o d o so. H e shall then have 7 (seven) d ays w ithin w hich t o
regularize his situation, f ollowing r eceipt of t he l atter, t he p ostmark o r signed mail register, i n
case o f h and delivery, b eing p roof thereof.
The r est s hall remain u nchanged.
DIVISION T he
OBLIGATION TO P RESERVE D OCUMENTS AND PERIOD O F PRESERVATION
Section M Sa: Notwithstanding t he p rovisions of Section M 6 of t his Code a nd u nder p ain o f
application o f t he p enalty provided for i n S ection M 1 04 ( 2) of the M anual of
Tax P roœdures, t he taxpayer shall b e bound to spontaneously transmit t o h is tax c entre w ithin
·
15 ( fifteen) d ays: ..
-ÿÿÿÿÿi7ÿ-
PRESSURE
PRE
3o
ACTIVE A ND AND
Aff AIRS C ÿR RVICE
IEE C O ME
TRUE


- t he auditor's r eports, as s oon a s t he c ompany h as been n otified t hereof;
- i nventories, d uly s igned a nd i nitialled, from the d ate on which t hey
submitted t o c ourt registries.
DIVISION IV
ADMINISTRATIVE OBLIGATIONS
Section M S a: ( 1) Corporate b illing a nd i nvoice production s hall be m onitored
electronically by the tax authority u nder c onditions laid down by order o f the Minister i n
charge o f f inance.
This s hall a pply in particular t o b usinesses i n the i nformation and communication
technology ( ICT) s ector, o nline trade, e lectricity, games o f c hance and
entertainment, i nsurance, b everages, oilseed products and d igital bouquets
sectors, a s w ell a s a ll e nterprises u nder the e ntity r esponsible f or m anaging l arge
enterprises o f t he tax a uthority.
To · i mplement t he system of e lectronic m onitoring o f c orportate billing a nd
invoice p roduction, t he t ax a uthority m ay u se extemal e xperts u nder t he c onditions
laid d own by agreement between t he p arties.
(2) lrrespective of their s tatus o r n ature, c ompanies shall b e bound to c omply w ith the
electronic m onitoring s ystem r eferred to i n paragraph ( 1) a bove.
Without prejudice t o the c ollection of taxes evaded, t ogether with t he p enalties and cri minai
www.prc.cm
sanctions p rovided .for in S ection M 1 08 e t seq o f t he M anual o f Tax P rocedures, f ailure t o c omply
with the o bligations r elating t o t he electronic i nvoicing o r p roduction monitoring system shall b e
punishable w ith a f ine e qual t o:
(cid:127) the v alue o f t he i nvoices i n question, i n the c ase of e lectronic i nvoice
monitoring;
(cid:127) the p roduction value c oncealed as a result o f t he b reach, in the c ase of
electronic p roduction m onitoring.
The r est shall r emain u nchanged.
SUB-PART I t
TAXCONTROL
CHAPTER I
RIGHT TO CONTROL
DIVISION Ill
CONDITIONS FOR EXERCISING THE R IGHT T O CONTROL
SUBDIVISION 1
ON-THE-SPOT CHECK
Section M 1 3 n ew: ( 1) At l east 15 ( fifteen) d ays b efore t he date s cheduled f or t he first
intervention, t he tax authority s hall s end, by r egistered mail o r b y h and with
PRESIDE p
31
Tif IEO T R · 1.IRE ,SERVICE R ME PY


acknowledgement o f r eceipt or b y discharge s lip, an a ccounting verification notice o r verification of the
overall t ax situation.
Mention must be made i n t he a udit notice, u nder p ain of the l atter b eing n ull a nd void, o f the p ossibility
of:
- b eing a ssisted b y a CEMAC-approved t ax a dviser r egistered w ith the o rder or a
centre o f approved m anagement o f t heir c hoice;
- c onsulting t he a udited taxpayer's c harter on t he t ax a uthority's website.
The rest s hall r emain unchanged.
Section M 1 9 a (new): ( 1) Enterprises established i n C ameroon a nd which a re dependent on o r contrai
companies l ocated i n C ameroon o r o utside Cameroon, w ithin t he m eaning of Section 1 9a of this C ode,
and which m eet one o f t he cçmditions s et out below, m ust make available t o the t ax a uthority, o n t he
date o f commencement o f t he a ccounting audit, i n e lectronic format, d ocuments enabling them t o justify
the t ransfer p ricing p olicy a pplied in t ransactions o f any k ind c arried out w ith affiliated e nterprises
established i n C ameroon o r o utside C ameroon w ithin t he m eaning of Section 1 9a of this Code:
- have a n annual t urnover e xcluding tax o r gross assets w hose a mount is e qual to o r greater
than C FAF 1,000,000,000 ( one billion); or
- hold d irectly or indirectly, at t he e nd o f the f inancial year, m ore t han 2 5% o f the share
cawpital o r v owting rightws o f an e n.terpprise estrablisched i n . Camceroonm or o utside
Cameroon w hose annual t urnover e xcluding t ax or g ross a ssets i s g reater than or
equal to CFA 1,000,000,000 (one b illion).
The rest s hall r emain unchanged.
DIVISION V
LIMITS O F THE R IGHT TO C ONTROL
Section M 4 1 ( a) - (1) Notwithstanding t he p rovisions o f Sections M 9 , M 1 0, M 1 1, M 1 2, M 1 6 a nd M
21 o f the M anual o f T ax P rocedures, a tax p ayer may b e e xempted f rom a t ax a udit i n r espect of a given
tax year if, a t the end o f t he s aid f inancial year, h e s hows a r ate of increase i n t axes a nd duties p ayable
on a v oluntary basis of a t l east 25% compared with the p revious y ear.
The r est s hall r emain u nchanged.
SUB-PART Ill
T AX C OLLECTION
CHAPTER I
METHODS OF C OLLECTION
DIVISION The
NOTICE O F ISSUE F OR C OLLECTION
Section M 5 3: (1) The N otice o f I ssue for Collectîon s hall b e a n e nforceable d eed f or t he forœfull
collection o f taxes, duties a nd l evies. (cid:127)'
32


(2) T he Notice o f I ssue for Collection s hall b e d rawn up a nd n otified to the t axpayer
where a written declaration i s not a ccompanied b y m eans of p ayment o r f o l lowing a
non-market value r etum or of the f inal p rocedure document i n t he c ase o f a c ontrai.
Subject t o the a pproval of t he D irector G eneral of Taxation, the Notice o f Issue
for C ollection may b e d rawn u p before f iling the final p rocedure d ocument, i n
particular in t he c ontext o f a g eneral accounts audit, where the taxes h ave been
expressly accepted in t he m inutes by t he taxpayer. ln t his c ase, a Partial Notice
of Issue for C ollection shall e stablish the principal amount o f the tax a ccepted
and t he penalties a nd i nterest f or l ate payment n ormally due. A t the end o f t he
contrai procedure, a s upplementary notice o f issue f or c ollection shall b e d rawn
up f or t he outstanding taxes.
The rest s hall r emain u nchanged.
(3) T he taxpayer may a lso be i ssued and n otified of t he N otice o f I ssue for C ollection
by e lectronic m eans. ln t his case, t he N otice o f I ssue for C ollection s hall be d eemed
to have been n otified w hen the s ystem generates a n a cknowledgement o f r eceipt.
CHAPTER 11
PROCEEDINGS
DIVISION T he
SPECIAL LEGAL P ROCEEDINGS
www.prc.cm
SUBDIVISION V I
EXCLUSION FROM S PECIFIC P ROCEDURES
Section M 79: Failure t o p ay l evies, taxes and duties following a f ormai n otice shall entail a temporary
ban f rom bidding f or public c ontracts, e xpression o f i ntent t o b uy a p ublic corporation u nder privatization,
carrying o ut s tock market t ransactions, bidding f or t ogging permits o r a pplying for t he i ssuance o f secure
consignment n otes, a nd a p ermanent b an i n c ase of a f urther offence.
The Director G eneral of T axation s hall, i n e ach q uarter, draw up a l ist o f taxpayers b anned f rom bidding.
CHAPTER Ill
COLLECTION G UARANTEES
DIVISION I ll
JOINT AND S EVERAL P AYMENT
Section M 86: The notice o f i ssue f or collection r egularly d rawn up s hall be e nforceable n ot o nly a gainst
the t axpayer w ho i s mentioned t herein, b ut a ise a gainst his r epresentatives or r ightful claimants .
. .. ... ... ... ... ... . .. ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . - - - . . . ... ... ... ... ...... ... .. . . . . ... . ..
N_C_E_O_E PRESIDENT __ .....(cid:127) JBL1oi:Œ:::::J 7 --PR_E_S_I_O_E
33
ETR
Y A ff A IRS CARO Cf
IFIEE C O f t ME
TDIII: -..,


Where the r ights o ver natural resources o r stocks, shares a nd b usiness of an e nterprise under
Cameroonian l aw are t ransferred a broad, the C ameroonian law e nterprise and t he transferor shall be
jointly a nd s everally l iable t o p ayment o f t he sums d ue u nder such t ransfer.
The rest s hall r emain unchanged.
CHAPTERIV
T A X COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE
Section M 94a: ( 1) A ny n atural person o r corporate b ody f iable to a tax, d uty or levy, in g ood standing
with t he d eclaration and payment o f s uch t axes, d uties a nd l evies m ay, u pon request, b e i ssued a tax
compliance c ertificate f rom the tax authority. T his shall certify t hat t he taxpayer i s in g ood standing with
his o r h er t ax d eclaration o bligations a nd does n ot owe a ny t ax a s a t the date o f issue.
(2) Notwithstanding t he p rovisions of p aragraph 1 above, t he tax c omplianœ œ rtificate
may a lso b e issued t o a t axpayer who o wes a tax d ebt, where:
- t he d eadline provided f or in S ection M 5 3 o f the Manual of T a x Procedures f or
payment o f t he tax debt h as n ot expired;
- t he t axpayer i s under a payment s uspension or moratorium d uly g ranted by the
competent a uthorities.
ln such a case, the tax debt a nd the nature of the suspensive i nstrument shall be i ndicated o n t he tax
complwianœ c ertificwate. w.prc.cm
The rest shall r emain unchanged.
(3) The t ax compliance c ertificate s hall be i ssued online f rom t he tax a uthority's
computer s ystem. T he a uthenticity of a ny t ax compliance certificate issued
electronically shall b e v erified by its p resence o n t he list of tax c ompliance c ertificates
published e lectronically by the tax authority.
The t ax compliance c ertificate shall b e v alid f or 3 (three) m onths with e ffect f rom t he date o n w hich it is
signed. T his p eriod shall be r educed t o 1 ( one) m onth w here t he t axpayer has b enefited from a suspension
of p ayments or a m oratorium o n his or her t ax d ebt.
Section M 94b: ( 1 ) A ny n atural p ersan o r corporate body l iable f or t ax, d uties o r levies t hat r equests a
title, l icence, certification, a ttestation, a uthorization o r approval w hatsoever f rom p ublic or s emi-public
government s ervices w ithin the context o f c arrying o ut their a ctivities, m ust n ecessarily mention t heir
Single I dentification N umber (SIN) o n t he request and a ttach thereto a valid tax c ompliance certificate.
Failure to p roduce t his d ocument s hall l ead t o inadmissibility of tÿe r equest.
(2) The tax compliance c ertificate s hall s erve a s tax o r non-tax c ertificate and t ax
situation s lip. l t s hall b e t he only valid d ocument i n a ll a dministrative procedures to
prove t he t ax situation o f a taxpayer.
Section M 94c: ( 1) T he f ollowing s hall b e s ubject to presentation o f a valid tax c ompliance c ertificate:
·
- t ransfers o f f unds abroad by p rofess ers;
c- . - .
· ..
34
SERVICE
nDa.-


- issuance o f exemption c ertificates a nd payment o f t axes a nd duties;
- payment of invoices and s ubsidies b y the S tate, regional and local
authorities, p ublic establishments, s emi-public o r public e nterprises a nd
private c ompanies, t he list o f w hich shall b e drawn u p b y t he m inister in
charge o f finance;
- export t ransactions;
- visa a pplications a t diplomatie a nd c onsular m issions.
SUB-PART I V
PENALTIES
CHAPTER
FISCAL PENALTIES
DIVISION T he
SPECIAL PENALTIES
Section M 104: ( 1) A f ixed fine that m ight g o u p t a C FAF 5 0 00 000 (five m illion) s hall be
applied to any persan w ho gives taise i nformation, who a bjects t o t he right t a c ommunication or
to t he n otice t a third party holders,. o r who r efuses t o p rovide the informé;ition o r documents
required b y t he T ax Authority pursuant t a t he provisions o f S ections 1 8 ( 4),18b ( deleted), 79, 93i
www.prc.cm
(6), 2 45, 5 83, 5 83a (1), 583b ( 1), 598a, M 1 , M 6 , M 8 d a nd M 4 8b of t he Manual o f T ax
Procedures. Similarly, a f ine o f CFAF 100 0 00 (one h undred) p er day o f d elay, b eyond the time
limits i ndicated o n the r equest, s hall be applied f or any a ttempt t o a bject t o t he execution o f t he
right t o communication o r notification o f t hird-party holders.
(2) The f ine r eferred t o in (1) a bove shall b e increased t o C FAF 5 0 0 00 000 (fifty
million) i n t he e vent of failure to comply with t he obligations set o ut in Sections
18b, 18c a nd M 6a of this C ode.
ÿ
Section M 104b: W ithout p rejudice t o the collection o f t axes e vaded, t ogether w ith
penalties, f ailure t o issue a certificate of d eduction a t source or payment o f t axes u sing
the t ax a uthority's c omputer s ystem s hall b e punishable w ith a f ine corresponding t o t he
amount of t he t ransaction carried o utside t he s ystem.
CHAPTER I I
PENALTIES
DIVISION 1
PRINCIPAL PENALTIES
Section M 108: T he p enalties r eferred to i n S ection M 1 07 above shall also b e i nflicted upon
whoever:
- faits t o m ake o r ensure t he m aking o f entries, o r abets the making o f
inaccurate o r fake entries into the j ournals and balance sheet books
PRESSURE
PRE 35
AND
VICE
RME


provided f or b y t he OHADA U niform A ct o r into documents s erving as such, a s well a s any
person c onvinced o f h aving d rawn up or a betted t he d rawing
UP of f alse balance s heets;
- t hrough a ll types o f m anoeuvres, o bstructs t he implementation_ o f the system
for the e lectronic m onitoring a nd production of invoices by è nterprises;
The r est s hall remain u nchanged.
SUB-PART V
TAX D ISPUTES
CHAPTER I
CONTENTIOUS J URISDICTION
DIVISION 1
PRIOR R EFERRAL B EF ORE THE T A X A UTHORITIES
SUBDIVISION I ll
STAY O F PAYMENT
Section M 121 (new): (1) A taxpayer w ho disputes t he j ustification for o r t he a mount o f a tax
levied o n h im may o btain a n administrative stay o f p ayment of t he d isputed p art of t he s aid t ax,
under t he following c onditions:
a . .............................. .
www.prc.cm
b. ·······························
C . ............................... .
(2) .................. ................................................................................. ;
(3) The stay of p ayment may b e issued manually w ithin 15 (fifteen) days f rom the d ate
of receipt o f the r equest. Failure by t he tax a uthorities t o r espond within this period
shall b e t antamount t o t acit a cceptance o f t he d eferment o f p ayment.
(4) The stay of p ayment shall c ease to h ave e ffect 8 (eight) days after notification
of t he decision o f t he a uthority seized o r, i n t he event of silence, after expiry of
the t ime l imit for the l atter t o t ake a d ecision.
The rest s hall remain u nchanged
DIVISION T he
TRANSACTIONS
Section M 125: T he M inister in c harge o f f inance m ay, on the r ecommandation of t he
Director-General of T axation, m ayas p art of a transaction, authorize t he m oderation of a il or p art
of the taxes i n t he following t wo cases:
- p rior t o collection f ollowing a n audit procedure;
- d uring t he entire l itigation p rocedure, i ncluding f or t axes w hose claims h ave been
declared i nadmissible o n f ormai grounds, where s uch t axes m ay b e reviewed
on the m erits.
PRESIDENCY D
The rest s hall remain u nchanged
PRESSURE
IRE 36
RVICE
ME
and


CHAPTER 11
VOLUNTARY J URISDICTION
DIVISION The
TAX P AYERS' P ETITIONS
SUBDIVISION II
DECISION O F THE TAX A UTHORITY
Section M 145: (1) Decisions on r emission or r eduction shall be notified o nline t hrough t he IT
System o f the General Directorate o f Taxation.
(2) H owever, t he M inister o f F inance and t he Director-General of T axation m ay, within t he limit o f
theîr r elevant thresholds a s outlined below, g rant r emission o r r eduction higher t han t he rates s et i n
Section M 144 ( new) a bove, a s follows:
... ... ...... ... ... . . . ... . . . ...... ... ...... ... ...... .. . .. . .. . . .. ... ......... . . . . . . .. . ... · ·· · · 1
..... . . . . . . . ...... . . . ......... . .. ......... ... . .... . ... ... ... . ..... ...... ..... . ...... ... ... ..
,
CHAPTER T HREE
PROVISIONS R EGARDING OTHER RESOURCES
SECTION S IXTEEN: Establishment o f a v oluntary r egularization p rogramme
www.prc.cm
1. T axpayers w ho, o n their o wn initiative, voluntarily r egularize t heir tax s ituation w ith
regard t o their i ncome and a ssets owned o utside C ameroon d uring t he 2024 financial
year, shall b e exempt from t he c orresponding penalties.
2. A t the e nd o f the 2 024 financial y ear, n o r emission o f penalties shall b e granted f or
these t ypes o f i ncome for the p eriod not p rescribed.
SECTION S EVENTEEN: I nstitution o f a fee t o f inance t he digital transformation o f the tax
administration
1. A fee is h ereby instituted t o finance the digital t ransformation o f the tax
administration.
2. T he fee for f inancing t he digital t ransformation of the tax a dministration s hall b e levied o n
all documents generated from t he tax a dministration's I T s ystem, i n p articular:
- the r egistration c ertificate;
- the t ax compliance certificate.
3. T he fee provided for in (1) a bove shall b e fixed a t C FAF 1 0 00.
4. Proceeds f rom t he fee f or the f inancing o f the digital t ransformation o f the tax
administration s hall be allocated a s f ollows:
- 40% t o the S tate b udget;
.. ÿ ÿÿÿÿoe:'!Ai·,;- L IOUE PRES\OENCE
DE P RESIO cPU8
AND
VICE 37
RME
OP'i


- 6 0% f or t he financing o f t he d igital transformation o f the General
Directorate of T axation.
SECTION E IGHTEEN: R eadjustment o f w ater a bstraction t ax rates
The p rovisions o f S ECTION ELEVEN of the Finance L aw No. 2 004/026 o f 30 December 2 004
are amended a nd s upplemented a s follows:
"SECTION E LEVEN" ( NEW):
..(cid:127).(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127).(cid:127)(cid:127)...................................(cid:127)......(cid:127)..(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)..(cid:127).(cid:127)...(cid:127)...........
Rates f or the abstraction o f surface o r g roundwater f or industrial or commercial p urposes s hall b e as
follows:
- C FAF 1 50 p er cubic m etre f or t he f irst 1 000 c ubic m etres o f water abstracted;
- C FAF 7 5 p er cubic m etre for w ater used in e xcess o f 1 0 00 m 3 ;
- C FAF 2 5 p er cubic m etre f or t he a bstraction o f w ater for agricultural, l ivestock or
fish farming purposes i n e xcess o f 5 000 ( five t housand) p erson e quivalents p er day.
The rest shall r emain unchanged
SECTION N INETEEN: Establishment o f an amnesty f or n on-commercial real e state t ransfers
www.prc.cm
(1) A n amnesty i s e stablished f or r eal e state transfers submitted f or r egistration
between 1 January 2024 a nd 31 December 2 024, a s well as for r eal e state
transfers d eclared before 1 January 2 024.
(2) The a mnesty r eferred to i n (1) above s hall apply t o real e state t ransfers b y
way of i nheritance, d ivision, r elease f rom joint o wnership and inter v ivos
donations i n d irect l ine a nd between spouses.
(3) The n on-commercial r eal e state t ransfers r eferred to in this section shall b e
exempt f rom p enalties a nd any other t ax increases.
(4) T he a mnesty s hall b e g ranted at the r equest o f the taxpayer, w hich m ust b e
filed w ith t he taxpayer's l ocal t ax office.
SECTION l WENTY: Establishment o f a special p rocedure f or s ettling t ax claims issued before
31 D ecember 2 022
(1) The t ax a dministration s hall b e a uthorized t o implement a s pecial procedure
for s ettlement o f t ax claims i ssued b efore 31 December 2 022.
(2) The s pecial settlement p rocedure s hall run f rom 1 J anuary t o 31 December
2024 a nd a s follows:
a) T ransactions r elating to t axes in c ontentious p roceedings:
- F or d isputes i n t he administrative p hase: a 5 0% d eduction on the
outstanding a mount in d ispute, with s ureties b eing f orfeited t o the
Treasury. l n t his c ase, t he amount t o be paid m ay b e subject to a_ schedule
of n ot exceeding three m onths;
,-ÿÿ----
P PR R E S IOE N ÿ - -ÿÿ-ÿÿÿÿÿÿ
38
----·-·-- AIRE .SERVICE R Mf;


- For d isputes a t the jurisdictional p hase: a 6 5% deduction o n t he
outstanding a mount i n dispute, w ith sureties b eing forfeited t o t he
Treasury. l n this c ase, t he amount t o b e p aid may be s ubject to a s chedule
not e xceeding t hree m onths;
b) T ransactions relating to u ncontested t ax a rrears:
- For p ublic o r semi-public e ntities: a 7 0% reduction, w ith the p ossibility o f
spreading payments o ver a m aximum period of t welve months;
- For p rivate e ntities: a 5 0% r eduction with the p ossibility o f s preading
payments f or u p to twelve months.
(3) To implement t he s pecial s ettlement r elating to d isputed t ax d ebts, t he
sureties r equired by law f or contentious a ppeals m ust have been paid.
(4) T ax a rrears settled through t he mutual d ebt set-off p rocedure f or r eciprocal
debts s hall not b e covered by this s pecial s ettlement p rocedure.
(5) N o request for a s pecial settlement s hall be a cceptable b eyong 31 D ecember
2024.
(6) W here the t axpayer a ccepts t he transaction p roposai(cid:127) , h e w illingly u ndertakes:
(cid:127) not t o l odge a s ubsequent c laim;
www.prc.cm
(cid:127) to w ithdraw a ny c laims or r equests m ade.
SECTION T WENTY-ONE: Amendment of s ome provisions r elating to S tate property,
cadastral a nd l and r evenue
The provisions o f S ection Twenty-three o f L aw No. 2 022/020 of 2 7 D ecember 2 022 r elating to t he
Finance L aw of the Republic of C ameroon f or t he 2023 f inancial year a re a mended as f ollows:
"SECTION T WENTY-THREE ( new)": Provisions relating t o State property, c adastral a nd land revenue.
The r ates for f ees r elating t o the State p roperty, cadastral a nd l and tenure operations l isted in
Section T hirteen o f Law N o. 9 1 /003 o f 30 J une 1991 : Finance Law o f t he R epublic o f C ameroon
for the 1991-1992 f inancial y ear a re a mended a s f ollows:
"SECTION T HIRTEEN" (new):
Section 1 4 of Finance Law N o. 9 0/001 of 2 9 J une 1990 is a mended a s f ollows:
Paragraph 1 : T he r ates o f fees r elating t o t he S tate property, c adastral a nd l and t enure operations
listed in A rticle 19 of Ordinance N o. 7 4 /1 o f 6 J uly 197 4 t o e stabl!sh r ules governing l and tenure
are amended a s follows:
1- E STABLISHMENT OF A LAND T ITLE
b) B y parcelling o ut existing p roperties.
(cid:127) 2% of t he purchase price i n the event o f a n e xpensive p urchase;
PRESIDE
PR 39
AND
RVICE
uÿ
---


(cid:127) 2% o f t he m arket value s tated i n the n otarial d eed in the case o f a f ree
acquisition.
(cid:127) 3% of the purchase p rice w here the p roperty i s a cquired at h igh c ost;
(cid:127) 2% of the market v alue s pecified i n the notarial d eed w here the p roperty
is acquired f ree o f c harge .
... ... ... ... . . . ... . . . ... ... . .. . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . .. ... ... ... . . . ... . . . . . . . .. ... ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... ...
... ... . . . . . . . . . ... ... . . . ... . .. . . . ... . .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... .. . ... .. . . . . . . . ... ...
(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) 6 (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) ÿ (cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127)
Il. VARIOUS E NTRIES IN T HE LAND R EGISTER
a) M ortgages a nd l iens;
(cid:127) 1 .25% of t he market value o f t he p roperties c oncerned;
b) T otal t ransfers;
(cid:127) By s ale: 3% of the purchase p rice.
V- TOPOGRAPHIC A ND CADASTRAL WORKS:
www.prc.cm
V-1-1- P lanimetrics
- Demarcation:
a)
Land r egistration, c oncession, p arcelling a nd s imple d elimitation m arking.
For the execution o f t hese works, the f ollowing tees s hall b e charged:
For land l ocated w ithin t he u rban p erimeter
(cid:127) 50 000 f rancs f or a surface a rea l ess t han or e qual to 5 0 00 m 2
(cid:127) 5 0 00 francs per additional h ectare for a n area greater than 5 0 00 m 2 (cid:127)
VI. CONCESSIONS A ND LEASES O N NATIONAL L AND, AS W ELL A S L EASES
ON T HE P RIVATE P ROPERTY OF T HE STATE
The b asic f ee for c oncessions and l eases o n national land p rovided for in Article 15 of
Decree N o. 7 6/166 of 2 7 A pril 1 976 t o l ay d own t he tenns and c onditions for managing t he
national e state, as w ell a s ordinary o r long leases o n the private p roperty o f t he State
as p rovided for i n estate p rovided f or i n D ecree No. 7 6/167 of 2 7 April 1 976 t o l ay
down t he t erms a nd c onditions f or m anaging t he p rivate property o f t he State s hall,
depending o n t he nature and u se of t he land, b e fixed as f ollows p er ·,., square m etre:
40


a) T emporary c oncessions a nd l eases
Land use Urban land/m2 Rural l and/m2
'--
Residential 2 000 C FA francs 1 0 00 C FA francs
Commercial 3 0 00 C FA francs 1 500 C FA francs
lndustrial 900 C FA francs 450 C FA francs
Social 300CFAF 150 C FA francs
Cultural 150 C FA francs 80 CFA f rancs
Agricultural 4CFAF 2CFAF
Religious 10 CFA f rancs 10CFAF
... ... ... ... . . . . ..... ......... ... ... ... ... ... . . . . . . ... ... ... ... . . . . . . . ..... ... ... ...... ... ... ... . . . ... - -- ... .. .
.
.......... .......... ....................................................
VIII-FEE FOR T HE TEMPORARY O CCUPATION O F T HE P UBLIC DOMAIN
The p rovisions i n force s hall b e t hose o f D ecree N o. 2 014/3209/PM o f 2 9 S eptember
2014 t o f ix t he m inimum a nnual f ees for t he o ccupation o f S tate l and appurtenances.
The r est s hall r emain u nchanged.
SECTION lWENTY-TWO: P rovisions relating t o non-tax r evenue d erived f rom t he s ocial a ffairs
sector
www.prc.cm
1) The following are h ereby e stablished in t he s ocial a ffairs sector:
a) charges relating t o services p rovided by specialized e stablishments a nd
operational technical units;
b) f ees relating t o the examination of a pplications f or t he e stablishment of
private social welfare s chemes s hall b e as follows:
·
- fees for examining applications for agreement i n p rinciple for t he
establishment o pen a Private Social W elfare Institution;
- tees for e xamining applications for the final a uthorization for the
establishment of a private social welfare s cheme.
2) Provisions relating to tees f or s ervices provided b y specialized
establishments a nd operational t echnical units
a) The fees referred to in t his p aragraph must b e paid by any p erson s eeking to
benefit from the services provided a nd w ho m eets t he c riteria f or admission
to t he said entities.
b) T he f ees referred to in t his p aragraph s hall be fixed by regulation.
3) P rovisions relating t o the cost o f examining a pplications f or the e stablishment
of p rivate social welfare s chemes
a) Any natural o r legal p erson wishing t o establish a p rivate s ocial w elfare
scheme shall b e r equired to pay t he fees referred t o in t his p aragraph.
b) T he f ees referred to in t his p aragraph shall b e fixed by re 1;11
PRESIDENCY
p
ri;.;u-(cid:127)" ÿIRE 41
,SEÿVICt
RME
PY
FIED


SECTION l WENTY-THREE: Provisions r elating to n on-tax r evenue derivedfrom t he
agriculture a nd rural d evelopment s ector.
1) T he following a re h ereby i nstituted within t he meaning of L aw N o. 2 001/014 of
23 J uly 2001 o n s eed-related a ctivities:
- fees for t he r egistration o f plant species and v arietries o n t he official
catalogue;
- f ees for t he rentai o f s eed farms ( storage w arehouse, packaging u nits, tractor,
greenhouse, h angar, l and, e tc.);
- a dministrative c osts and tees f or t he conduct o f D ifferentiation -
Homogeneity - S tability ( DHS) a nd A gronomie and T echnological V alue
(A TV) t ests.
2) A ny n atural or legal p ersan engaged in s eed-related a ctivities w ithin t he
meaning of the l aw of 23 July 2 001 shall b e subject to t he payment of t he tees
and royalties r eferred to in p aragraph 1 a bove.
3) T he f ees for the r egistration o f p lant species and v arieties i n t he Official
Catalogue s hall be a s follows:
a) R egistration of plant s pecies a nd v arieties in t he Official C atalogue for a
period of 5 (five) y ears:·
- s eeds f rom l ocally p roduced p lant s pecies and v arieties: CFAF 1 00 000 per
vwariety; ww.prc.cm
- s eeds from i mported p lant s pecies and v arieties: C FAF 2 00 000 per v ariety.
b) R eregistration o f plant s pecies a nd v arieties in t he O fficial C atalogue for a
period of 5 (five) y ears:
- s eeds from l ocally p roduced p lant s pecies and v arieties: C FAF 5 0 0 00;
- seeds f rom i mported p lant s pecies and v arieties: CFAF 1 00 000.
4) T he costs o f renting seed f arms ( storage w arehouse, packaging u nit, t ractor,
greenhouse, s hed, land, e tc.) s hall b e fixed by regulation.
5) T he administrative c osts and fees for carrying o ut t he differentiation-homogeneity-
stability ( DHS) a nd agronomie a nd t echnological v alue ( VAT)
tests s hall be C FAF 2 0 00 000 p er v ariety.
SECTION l WENTY-FOUR: P rovisions r elating to non-tax revenue derived from t he t rade s ector
1) The following fees are hereby instituted in t he trade sector:
- application tees f or authorization t o c arry o ut c ommercial a ctivities i n
Cameroon;
annual licence a pplication t ees f or the importation o f m otorbikes a nd t heir
spare parts;
PRESIDENCY ooÿ·ÿ·ÿ(cid:127) ÿÿÿ===>
PRES!
ÿ
42
THIS
ME


- fees r elating t o the e xamination o f t he application for a declaration of
existence;
- application f ees f or the o btention of a certificate o f d eficiency for any product s ubject to
excise d uty p rior to i mportation by an e conomic o perator;
- application fees f or metrology a pproval.
2) Provisions relating t o a pplication fees for a uthorization to c arry o ut c ommercial activities in
Cameroon.
a) The f ollowing s hall be subject t o p ayment o f the f ees r eferred t o in (1) above every 3 ( three)
years:
- legal p ersans carrying o ut commercial activities of w hich at least 50% o f
the share capital is h eld by foreigners;
- natural p ersons carrying out commercial activities i n Cameroon who are not o f Cameroonian
nationality.
b) The f ees referred to in ( 1) a bove s hall b e a s f ollows:
- CFAF 1 0 00 0 00 for public limited c ompanies (PLC) a nd simplified j oint
stock c ompanies;
- CFAF 5 00 000 for limited l iability companies (SARL), collective name
www.prc.cm
companies (SNC) and limited partnerships (SC$);
- CFAF 200 000 for i ndividuals.
3) P rovisions relating t o the a nnual l icence a pplication f ees f or the i mportation o f m otorbikes and
their s pare p arts;
a) Legal a nd n atural p ersons importing motorcycles and their s pare p arts shall
be s ubject to the p ayment o f the f ees r eferred t o i n (1) above;
b) The f ees r eferred to i n ( 1) a bove s hall b e a s f ollows:
- CFAF 1 0 00 0 00 for p ublic limited companies (PLC) a nd simplified j oint stock companies;
- CFAF 5 00 000 for l imited liability c ompanies;
- CFAF 1 00 000 for i ndividuals.
4) Provisions relating to fees relating t o t he e xamination of t he a pplication for a declaration of
existence
a) Any economic operator wishing to m arket cocoa o r c offee i n Cameroon shall b e s ubject to the
payment of t he fees referred to i n ( 1) a bove a nd must o btain a certificate of declaration of
existence issued b y t he M inistry i n c harge of t rade.
b) T he f ees f or e xamining the a pplication f or the a forementioned certificate s hall be f ixed a s
follows for a period of 5 (five) y ears:
PRESIDENT
PRE 43
IRE .
ERVICE
ORME 1 11:ICft T DI - DV
.


- C FAF 1000 000 f or p ublic l imited companies ( PLC) and s implified j oint
stock c ompanies;
- CFAF 500 0 00 for l imited liability c ompanies;
- CFAF 200 0 00 for individuals.
c) However, producers and industrialists shall not pay t he above charges.
d) The following shall b e exempt from the payment of the fees referred to in (1)
above: o rganizations established by p roducers a nd l ocal processing u nits.
5) P rovisions relating to the a pplication f ees for t he obtention of a c ertificate o f
deficiency f or a ny p roduct subject to excise duty prior t o importation by a n e conomic
operator.
a) E conomie operators wishing t o be e xempted f rom import excise duties u nder t he
conditions l aid d own b y tax and c ustoms legislations shall be s ubject to payment
of the f ees referred to in ( 1) above.
b) The certificate r eferred to i n (1) above shall be i ssued by t he Minister in charge
of trade on a one-off o r o ccasional basis for each transaction.
c) T he fees referred t o in this p aragraph s hall be C FAF 1 0 00 000.
6) Provisions relating to fees for applications f or metrology a pproval issued by t he
Minister i n c harge o f t rade f or a p eriod of 3 ( three) years
www.prc.cm
a) l mporters, manufacturers, suppliers a nd r epairers of measuring i nstruments, a s
well a s l aboratories c arrying out calibrations a nd m etrological t ests, shall be
subject to payment of the f ees referred t o in (1) above.
b) The fees referred to in (1) above s hall be a s f ollows:
- i mporters, repairers and manufacturers o f measuring i nstruments: CFAF
1 000 000;
- calibration a nd m etrological testing l aboratories: C FAF 1 0 00 000.
c) W here t he a pplication for m etrological approval covers s everal activities, the
highest amount s hall b e deducted without accumulation.
7) P rovisions relating to o ffences provided f or in Law N o. 2015/018 o f 21
December 2 015 governing commercial activity i n Cameroon.
a) V iolations of the p rovisions o f Law N o. 2015/018 o f 21 D ecember 2 015 g overning
commercial activity i n Cameroon s hall be p unishable by a f ine e qual to 5 ( five)
times the v alue o f the goods i n question, with a m inimum fine o f CFAF 30 0 00
(thirty t housand) for n atural persans and C FAF 100 000 (one hundred t housand)
for l egal p ersons.
b) The offences provided f or in t he law r eferred to in this p aragraph shall be
punishable by a financial penalty e qual to 1 0 (ten) times the value of the goods
in question, with a minimum of CFAF 1 00 000 (one hundred t housand) f or n atural
persons and CFAF 2 50 000 (two hundred a nd f ifty thousand) f or l egal persons.
,..
PRESIDENCY O F T HE
· P RESIDENT Rf.JMfflÿ 44
m,IRSC THIS
IEE CO
AND
---- --· ·-


SECTION T WENTY-FIVE: Provisions r elating t o n on-tax r evenue d erived f rom t he communication
sector
1) R evenue d erived f rom t he communications s ector as s tipulated in Law N o.
2015/007 o f 2 0 A pril 2 015 governing audiovisual a ctivity in Cameroon and Law
No. 2006/018 o f 29 D ecember 2 006 t o r egulate advertising i n Cameroon, s hall
notably o f:
- fees, c harges a nd royalties f or t he i ssuance and o peration o f a udiovisual
licences;
- fees a nd c harges f or t he issuance and u se o f t he a uthorization t o c arry o ut
some a udiovisual a ctivities;
- fees f or the i ssuance a nd use o f accreditation for the p roduction and
provision o f audiovisual p rogrammes limited i n time and space;
- · application t ees f or t he a ccreditation o f f oreign j ournalists w ishing t o w ork i n
Cameroon on a temporary b asis;
- miscellaneous fines;
- Fees f or e xamining a pplications for authorization a nd for the operation o f
authorizations t o engage i n the a dvertising p rofession;
2) P rovisions r elating to fees, rights a nd royalties for the issuance a nd use o f
audiovisual l icences.
www.prc.cm
a) N atural o r l egal persans e ngaged in t he following a ctivities shall b e subject t o
the p ayment of fees a nd royalties f or the grant and use o f t he a udiovisual
licences r eferred t o in (1) a bove:
- publishers;
service providers;
- aggregators;
- audiovisual c ontent aggregators;
- distributors o f a udiovisual services;
- conditional a ccess s ystem operators;
- publishers o f persona! mobile t elevision services;
- satellite t elevision operators;
- cable f olevision o perators;
- operators o f audiovisual c ontent b roadcasting platforms.
b) T he c ost, fees and royalties for t he i ssuance and o peration o f a udiovisual
licences s hall be a s follows:
1. Fees f or t he e xamination o f applications f or, o r r enewal, o f a udiovisual
licences:
PRESIDE
PR
45
NTARY
X S ERVICE
RMI;
DV


- l ocal r adio broadcasting: CFAF 250 0 00;
- n ational radio b roadcasting: CFAF 500 0 00;
- foreign radio b roadcasting: C FAF 1000 0 00;
- national television b roadcasting o r p rogramme e diting: CFAF 500 0 00;
- foreign television broadcasting o r p rogramme e diting: CFAF 500 0 00
- national audiovisual c ontent package d istributor, audiovisual c ontent
aggregator o f Cameroonian nationality ( cable, t errestrial o r s atellite
distribution): C FAF 500 000;
- national audiovisual c ontent package d istributor a nd f oreign audiovisual
content aggregator ( cable, t errestrial or s atellite d istribution): C FAF 500
000.
2. Fees f or obtaining o r renewing a l icence t o operate a n a udiovisual
communication enterprise:
- local r adio broadcasting / 5 years: C FAF 5 0 00 0 00;
- national radio b roadcasting /5 y ears: CFAF 25 0 00 0 00;
- foreign radio b roadcasting /5 y ears: CFAF 50 0 00 0 00;
- tewlevision bwroadcastinwg o r natio.nal 1 pV progrrammce e ditin.g / c5 y earsm: CFAF
100 0 00 000;
- national audiovisual c ontent package d istributor, a udiovisual c ontent
aggregator o f C ameroonian nationality ( cable, terrestrial or s atellite
distribution) / 5 years: C FAF 100 0 00 0 00;
- national audiovisual c ontent package d istributor, f oreign audiovisual
content a ggregator ( cabie, t errestrial or s atellite d istribution) / 5 y ears:
CFAF 150,000,000.
3. Audiovisual l icence f ee: 3 % of a nnual turnover e xcluding taxes.
3) P rovisions r elating t o the p ayment o f fees and r oyalties f or the granting and
operation of licences t o engage in certain audiovisual a ctivities.
a) N atural o r l egal p ersons carrying out t he following a ctivities s hall b e s ubject
to t he payment o f f ees and r oyalties f or the granting and o peration of licences
to carry o ut s ome o f t he a udiovisual activities r eferred t o in (1) a bove:
- t he marketing o f p roducts o r services p rovided b y e ither p ublishers or
producers;
- the installation of audiovisual c ontent storage p latforms;
- the installation a nd a djustment o f audiovisual p roduction e quipment;
- t he operation o f audiovisual p roduction r esource c entres;
- t he marketing o f p roduction e quipment and r eception terminais;
PRE 46
AT GENE ,ra'
ÿÿÿifmffiifNirsrourm t""" 1 LA t T t IF ET A1I R
- _ _ _ _ _ __ RE .FFAIRS C ARDF R VlrS:


- the p rovision o f value-added services r elated to the d igital television
environment.
b) T he fees and royalties f or t he g ranting a nd o peration of licences f or c ertain
audiovisual a ctivities s hall be as f ollows:
- a pplication f ees f or l icences r elating t o the a ctivities o f audiovisual
communication c ompanies: C FAF 5 00 0 00;
'
- royalty f or t he o peration o f t he l icence relating to the a ctivities o f
audiovisual c ommunication companies: 3 % o f annual turnover excluding
taxes.
4) Provisions r elating to the p ayment o f t ees 'for t he g ranting and operation o f
accreditation f or t he p roduction a nd d istribution o f audiovisual p rogrammes
limited i n time a nd s pace.
a) Natural o r legal persons producing a nd/or publishing a udiovisual
programmes s hall be subject to the p ayment o ffees for t he i ssue a nd use o f
the a ccreditation f or t he p roduction and d istribution o f audiovisual
programmes l imited in t ime a nd s pace r eferred to in ( 1) a bove.
b) T he fees for the i ssuance and o peration o f accreditation for t he p roduction
and provision o f audiovisual p rograms s hall b e as f ollows:
- tees for the e xamination o f applications f or a ccreditation: C FAF 250 0 00;
www.prc.cm
- f ees f or the u se o f accreditation for t he p roduction a nd distribution o f
audiovisual p rograms: F CFA 500,000.
5) The application f ee for t he a ccreditation o f foreign journalists w ishing to work in
Cameroon on a temporary b asis, a s r eferred t o in ( 1) a bove s hall b e CFAF 100
000.
6) Provisions r elating to the p ayment o f tees for t he i ssue a nd operation of
advertising l icences
a) Natural o r legal persons e ngaged i n t he a dvertising p rofessions s hall b e
subject to the p ayment o f fees f or t he issue a nd operation of the a dvertising
licences r eferred t o i n ( 1) a bove.
b) T he tees for issuing a nd o perating advertising l icences s hall b e as f ollows:
- t ees for the e xamination o f applications f or a dvertising l icences: C FAF 500
000;
- a dvertising licence t ee: 2 % o f turnover, e xcluding t axes ( excluding V AT).
7) The fines referred t o in ( 1) above, applicable t o the c ommunication s ector shall
be a s follows:
a) from CFAF 2 50 000 to C FAF 2 500 0 00 a nd a penalty o f from CFAF 100 0 00 t o
CFAF 1 000 000 p er i ssue o r per d ay o f publication, f or a ny o wner of a media
or audiovisual c ommunication outlet w ithout a n editor provided f or i n
Sections 8 and 3 7 o f the 2 0 A pril 2015 Law referred to in ( 1 ), a s w ell as f or a ny
l#
PPRREESSSIDUREENSCY O F ÿÿÿ - --ÿ--ÿÿÿÿ;;;;"
47
NERA
S TRE\3 AND
AIRS
ICt
CAROi~ AND COf!
ME
I S:11:h'l'n(cid:127)(cid:127)-


person who p ublishes a m edia outlet w ithout a d eclaration or who publishes a foreign
media outlet t hat is p rohibited;
b) from C FAF 300 0 00 t o C FAF 3 000 0 00 and a penalty of C FAF 1 00 0 00 t o C FAF 1 0 00 0 00
per issue p ublished, for a ny p erson who p ublishes a p ress outlet t hat has b een b anned;
c) f rom C FAF 200 0 00 t o C FAF 5 0 00 000 f or any person who secures o wnership of o r
acquires h oldings i n m ore t han t hree w ritten p ress outlets and m ore t han o ne a udiovisual
communication o utlet i n b reach of t he provisions o f t he l aw on the financial t ransparency
of social c ommunication o utlets, o r contravenes t he provisions o f t he law o n the financial
transparency o f social c ommunication outlets;
d)from C FAF 100 0 00 t o C FAF 1 000 0 00 and a p enalty of f rom CFAF 2 0 000 t o
CFAF 2 00 o oo p er day of r esidence o utside t he national t erritory, f or any e ditor w ho does
not reside i n C ameroon;
e) f rom C FAF 100 0 00 t o C FAF 1 000 0 00 and a penalty of f rom CFAF 1 00 000 t o
CFAF 5 00 000 p er n umber of n ewspapers p ublished, f or any person who publishes a
press outlet t hat has b een suspended;
f) f rom C FAF 100 0 00 t o C F.AF 1 000 0 00 and a penalty equal t o t he value of t he c opies
distributed, f or a ny p erson w ho continues t o d istribute a nd s ell a press outlet t hat has
been i mpounded o r a f oreign press o utlet that has been i mpounded;
www.prc.cm
g) from C FAF 1 00 0 00 t o C FAF 2 000 0 00 for any person who refuses t o p ublish o r broadcast
any r ectification w ithout justification;
h) from C FAF 50 000 t o C FAF 2 000 0 00 f or any p erson who refuses t o p ublish
or b roadcast any r esponse;
i) from C FAF 100 0 00 t o CFAF 1 000 0 00 p er newspaper issue published, f or any e ditor w ho
does n ot comply with t he obligations laid down b y the law o n the financial t ransparency
of social c ommunication o rgans, as well a s the authors jointly and s everally liable for the
financial penalties i mposed o n t hird p arties a gainst the persons d esignated i n the two
preceding a rticles, a s well a s any person w ho puts u p election p osters in violation o f t he
provisions o f the law o n t he f inancial t ransparency o f s ocial communication o rgans;
j) from C FAF 3 0 000 0 00 t o C FAF 1 00 0 00 000 for any licenced a udiovisual operator who
assigns o r transfers h is licence t o a t hird p arty, or lends h is name o r company n ame, in
any m anner w hatsoever, t o a person applying f or a l icence t o p rovide audiovisual
communication s ervices;
k) f rom C FAF 3 0 ooo 000 t o CFAF 1 00 0 00 000 f or any a udiovisual operator who provides
audiovisual s ervices w ithout h aving subscribed to t he technical o bligations of e ncryption;
1) f rom C FAF 5 0 000 0 00 t o C FAF 1 50 0 00 000 f or any licenced a udiovisual operator who
modifies t he distribution o f shares i n h is company, a nd/or modifies t he shares i nvolving
the e ntry o f a n ew p artner or s hareholder i n the capital of t he said c ompany, w ithout t he
approval o f the competent a uthoriÎ:y;
PRESIDENCY D
PRES 48
RE
VICE
ME
S:DT1e1!I!! ... - -··-


m) f rom C FAF 1 00 0 00 000 t o C FAF 3 00 0 00 0 00 f or any n atural person or l egal e ntity
of foreign n ationality, that h olds, directly or i ndirectly, m ore t han 4 9% (forty-
nine p er cent) of the c apital o r voting r ights in a c ompany that i s l icenced to
operate o ne or other a udiovisual communication a ctivity;
n) from C FAF 1 00 000 000 t o CFAF 3 00 0 00 0 00 f or any l icenced a udiovisual o perator
or any n atural o r legal p erson who c ontrols, a lone o r t ogether with o ther
shareholders, t he a ctivities o f a nother l icenced or a uthorized o perator w ith t he
same c orporate p urpose;
o) from C FAF 5 0 0 00 000 t o C FAF 3 00 0 00 0 00 f or any p ublic o r p rivate o perator of a
multiplex o r broadcast o f t he 3 1 a udiovisual c ommunication s ignais who, without
justification, r efuses to g rant access t o t he t echnical p latform t o a ny l icence or
accreditation h older;
p) from C FAF 5 0 0 00 0 00 to C FAF 2 00 0 00 0 00 f or any p ublic o r p rivate o perator o f a
multiplex o r broadcast o f a udiovisual c ommunication s ignais who, through h is
technical p latforms, e stablishes o r operates, o r p rovides a · n etwork, s ub-network
or a udiovisual s ervice to p ersans without a l icence or a ccreditation;
q)from C FAF 1 00 000 0 00 to C FAF 5 00 0 00 0 00 f or any p erson who t ransmits, o r
causes t he t ransmission o f, a n audiovisual p rogramme, i rrespective o f t he
technical m eans u sed, w ithout a licence o r a ccreditation;
r) from C FAF 5 0 0 00 0 00 to C FAF 300 0 00 0 00 f or any a udiovisual o perator w ho f ails
www.prc.cm
to comply with a decision t o s uspend o r w ithdraw h is licence;
s) f rom C FAF 5 0 0 00 000 t o C FAF 3 00 0 00 0 00 f or any a udiovisual o perator who f ails
to comply with t he c lauses o f a s pecification;
t) f rom C FAF 5 0 0 00 0 00 to C FAF 1 00 0 00 0 00 f or any a udiovisual o perator who f ails
to comply w ith t he i nformation a nd documentation r equirements l aid d own b y t he
legislation i n f orce;
u) from C FAF 2 00 000 000 t o C FAF 300 0 00 0 00 f or any d e j ure o r d e f acto manager
of a s atellite b roadcasting c ompany who p rovides audiovisual s ervices to t he
public w ithout h aving o btained a n o perating licence, and f or any d e j ure o r d e
facto m anager o f a terrestrial b roadcasting c ompany w ho h as p rovided audiovisual
services t o t he p ublic o n a f requency o ther t han t hat a llocated t o him o r w ho h as
carried o ut his a ctivity i n b reach o f t he p rovisions r elating to t he p ower o r l ocation
of the t ransmitter;
v) from F CFA,25 0 00 000 t o FCFA 7 5 000 0 00 f or a ny p erson who m anufactures,
imports o r possesses, w ith a v iew t o s elling o r o ffering for sale o r i nstalling, a ny
equipment, m aterial, d evice o r i nstrument d esigned, in w hole o r i n p art, for the
fraudulent i nterception o f b roadcast p rogrammes, w hen s uch p rogrammes a re
intended f or a specific p ublic w hich h as a ccess t o t hem i n r eturn for payment t o
the operator of the s ervice, as w ell as f or any p erson w ho o rders, d esigns,
organizes o r disseminates a dvertisements p romoting, directly o r i ndirectly, any
equipment, material, device o r i nstrument r eferred t o i n t his point.
PRESIDENCY OF ..(cid:127) -:::"'.'""."'!---
PRESIDENT
s
SERV
49
THIS
AND


w)Any o perator o r person i n the audiovisual s ector w ho b roadcasts, or c auses t o b roadcast transmit
or d isseminates a n a udio-visual p rogramme t hat s hows or t ends t o p opularize, i n violation o f
the r egulation i n force deviant p ractices i n Cameroon shall b e l iable to p ay a f ine o f f rom C FAF
50 0 00 000 to C FAF 3 00 0 00 0 00.
SECTION T WENTY-SIX: Provisions relating t o n on-tax r evenue d erived from t he higher e ducation
sector
1) The following a re h ereby instituted i n the higher e ducation sector:
- a pplication f ees f or t he equivalence o f f oreign q ualifications, g rades and
certificates;
· - t ees f or t he e stablishment, o pening, approval, a ccreditation and e xtension o f p rivate higher
education institutions;
- r egistration t ees f or c andidates taking national e xaminations ( Brevet d e
Higher T echnician a nd H igher National D iploma);
- r egistration f ees f or c andidates s itting n ational medical training
examinations.
2) P rovisions relating t o application t ees f or t he equivalence o f f oreign q ualifications, g rades a nd
certificates
a) Holdwers of f oreiwgn certificatwes, q ualifica.tionps a nd g rardes schall b e s .ubjecct to p aymment o f t he fe es
referred to i n t his p aragraph;
b) T he t ees r eferred to i n t his p aragraph shall be C FAF 25 000 p er qualification,
grade or c ertificate.
3) P rovisions r elating t o tees f or t he establishment, opening, licensing, a ccreditation and r enewal
of c ourses of s tudy of p rivate h igher education institutions.
a) Promoters o f p rivate h igher education institutions s hall b e s ubject to p ayment
of t he t ees referred to i n this p aragraph;
b) T he costs referred t o i n this p aragraph shall be a s follows:
Request f or a uthorization t o establish a PHEI CFAF 500 000
CFAF 500 000
Application f or authorization t o open a PHEI
CFAF 1000 000
Application f or t he registration o f a PHEI
CFAF 500 000 for every new
Application t o extend a PHEI
course of study
4) Provisions r elating t o f ees f or the r egistration o f c andidates for n ational e xaminations ( Brevet d e
Technicien S upérieur and H igher National D iploma)
a) Candidates f or t he B revet d e T echnicien S upérieur a nd H igher National
Diploma e xaminations s hall be s ubject to p ayment of t he fees r eferred to i n this p aragraph;
_
D _ E _ L _·-ÿÿÿÿÿ-
,__P_R _ E S_ I _ D _ E _ANND
_C _ (cid:127) PRESSURE 50
SERVIC ,ÿ,,r.cn
AND
. RVtCE
AR 1ÿ11:s: ÿ n uc


b) The fees referred to i n ( 1) above shall b e as f ollows:
5) Provisions relating to r egistration f ees f or candidates for n ational medical
training examinations.
a) Candidates for national examinations i n medical, pharmaceutical and
odontostomatological training shall be s ubject to p ayment o f the tees referred
to in this paragraph;
b) The fees referred to i n t his p aragraph are f ixed as f ollows:
Categories o f r evenue t o b e Amount
Type of f ees
collected payable ( CFAF)
Application tees f or the Category A 35500
Technician's C ertificate Category B 40500
Superior and H igher Category C 45500
National Diploma Category D 50500
examinations
Category E 55500
Application tees for National aptitude test f or medical, dental- 20 0 00
medical s chool e ntrance p harmaceutical a nd e xaminations
stomatological
training
National Specialisation E xamination 50 0 00
5) Provisions r elating t o the registration f ees of candidates f or national medical
traininwg examinatwions w.prc.cm
a) Candidates f or national medical, p harmaceutical and o donto-stomatological
training examinations shall be s ubject to payment o f the fees referred t o in t his
paragraph;
b) The tees referred to i n this p aragraph s hall b e as f ollows:
Amount to b e paid
Examinations
(CFAF)
National aptitude t est f or medical, p harmaceutical a nd o donto-
20 0 00
stomatological training
National specialization examination 50000
SECTION lWENTY-SEVEN: Provisions relating t o n on-tax r evenue derived f rom the environment
sector
1) The following fees a re h ereby i nstituted in t he environment sector:
- a nnual E nvironmental Compliance A ttestation ( ECA) application and r enewal
fees;
- environmental fines.
2) Provisions r elating to t he a nnual Environmental C ompliance Attestation
(ECA) application and r enewal f ees.
··---ÿ-,
--PÿRÿEÿS:":"I D ::':EÿN:;";CÿE:ionieÿLLJ··-·
PRESIDE
51
AND


a) Any n atural or l egal person h olding a n E nvironmental Compliance A ttestation
(ECA) o r a n Environmental Compliance C ertificate ( ECC) m ust pay a nnual
application a nd r enewal t ees f or a n E nvironmental Compliance A ttestation
(ECA).
b) The c osts referred t o i n this paragraph s hall b e a s follows:
No. Categories o f Assessment Amount (CFAF)
1 Project t hat has conducted a S trategic Environmental
Assessment ( SEA) or a d etailed Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment ( ESIA) 500 0 00
Facilities/establishments that have conducted an
Environmental a nd Social A udit ( ESA)
2 Project t hat has conducted a summary Environmental and S ocial
300 000
Impact Assessment ( ESIA)
3 Project t hat h as prepared a n Environmental I mpact
50 0 00
Statement (EIS)
3) A ny a pplication f or renewal s hall be s ubject t o payment o f the fees r eferred t o in
(1) above;
www.prc.cm
4) P rovision r elating t o e nvironmental f ines.
a) Any n atural or l egal p erson who causes damage t o the e nvironment s hall b e
liable t o an e nvironmental f ine a s r eferred t o in this paragraph.
b) The c osts referred t o i n this paragraph s hall b e d etermined in accordance w ith
the scale s et o ut in Annex 1 to t his C hapter.
SECTION lWENTV-EIGHT: P rovisions relating to non-tax r evenue d erived from t he
forestry a nd w ildlife sector.
The provisions of Section 1 4 of Law N o. 96/08 of 1 J uly 1 996 relating t o the Finance L aw o f the
Republic o f Cameroon f or t he 1 996/1997 f inancial year a re amended as f ollows:
"SECTION F OURTEEN" ( NEW):
"SECTION 1 5" ( NEW):
PHOTOGRAPHIC HUNTING
. . .................................................................................................. .
2 - T AX F OR H UNTING IN A CLOSED H UNTING AREA A ND C ONDUCT O F
HUNTING E XPEDITIONS I N A FORESTED AREA O F THE NATIONAL F OREST
DOMAIN
(cid:127)
. ........................................ -· - --ÿiElsfbEÊÿcE.OE.DAY. · ·ii · .. ÿ-ÿÿÿ7,
SE
IRE
Anw-nn 52
VICE
ME
and


(cid:127)
(cid:127)
3- L EASING RIGHTS I N CYNEGETIC A REAS
(cid:127)
. . . ... . . . ... ... ... . . . ... ... ......... ...... ... ...... . ........ ... ........ . ... ... ... ... ... ....... '
(cid:127)
4- G AME HUNTING T AX
The r ates f or the g ame h unting tax are specified in the schedule in Annex 2 A of this
chapter.
5 - CAPTURE FEES
The t ees f or the capture and retention of wildlife are s pecified in the schedule in Annex 2 B
of t his c hapter.
The r est shall r emain u nchanged
SECTION lWENTY-NINE: R ates f or some revenue from w ildlife s ervices and p rotected
areas
The. r ates o f revenue from w ildlife s ervices a nd p rotected areas, depending on t heir
nature, s hall be as follows:
www.prc.cm
1) A pplication fee f or t he r eview o f ZIC a nd Z ICGC wildlife inventory survey
plans: C FAF 1 00 000;
2) A pplication fee f or t he r eview o f Z IC and Z ICGC wildlife inventory reports:
CFAF 100,000;
3) A pplication f ee f or s ecure w ildlife transport documents: CFAF 10 0 00 p er unit;
4) Gorilla Sanctuary visiting fees p er h our
- N ationals CFAF 1 5 000
- Residents ( foreign residents): C FAF 50 0 00
- Tourists (non-resident foreigners): CFAF 100 0 00
5) F ees f or visits t o c learings of e lephants, giraffes, parrots, p igeons, Touraco and
other e mblematic s pecies a nd sites p er hour:
- Nationals: CFAF 5 000
- Residents (foreign residents): CFAF 2 0 0 00
- Tourists ( non-resident f oreigners): CFAF 30 000.
SECTION THIRTY: Provisions r elating to non-tax revenue d erived f rom t he housing a nd
urban d evelopment s ector.
PRESIDENCY O F T HE REPUBLIC
PRESIOENCY
SE
CHEESES 53
IC£
ME
PY


(1) Annual f ees a re h ereby i nstituted f or obtaining o r renewing the l icence t o
operate as a property developer, a real estate a gent or a jointly o wned building
manager.
(2) The fees referred t o i n ( 1) above shall be payable b y any natural or legal
person w ishing to o perate as a property d eveloper, real estate agent o r a
jointly owned building m anager.
(3) The application f ees r eferred t o i n (1) above shall b e as f ollows:
- C FAF 1 5 00 0 00 f or a property developer's l icence;
- C FAF 1 0 00 0 00 for a real e state agent's professional c ard;
- C FAF 2 50 0 00 f or the j ointly o wned b uilding manager's c ard.
(4) The renewal t ees referred t o i n paragraph 1 above a re set a s f ollows:
- C FAF 1 000 0 00 for t he real e state p romoter's l icence;
- C FAF 5 00 000 f or a real e state agent's professional c ard;
- C FAF 2 00 0 00 f or the c o-ownership g roup card.
SECTION T HIRTY-ONE: Provisions r elating to non-tax revenues f rom t he Youth A ffairs and Civic
Education s ector.
(1) Revenues f rom t he Y outh Affairs a nd C ivic E ducation sector c onsist mainly o f:
wregistratiwon a nd c ouwrse t ees f o.r thpe Multi-Prurpocse You.th Pcromotiomn
Centres (CMPJ);
registration a nd c ourse f ees f or t he Multi-Purpose Youth Promotion
Centres ( CMPJ);
course f ees a t the N ational C entre for Youth and S ports (CENAJES) in
Kribi, a ny person a dmitted for training a t the C ENAJES in Kribi;
the c ost o f i ssuance a nd r enewal o f t he B iometric Youth Card;
rentai f ees f or the M inistry of Y outh Affairs a nd C ivic E ducation's a nimation
logistics.
x) P rovisions r elating to r egistration and c ourse fees in M ulti-Purpose Y outh
Promotion Centres (MYPC).
a) A ny y outh w ishing t o u ndergo t raining i n a Multi-Purpose Youth Promotion
Centre ( MYPC) i s r equired t o p ay registration a nd c ourse f ees.
b) T he registration and c ourse t ees f or the Reference, R egional, Divisional and
Sub-divisional Multi-Purpose Y outh Promotion C entres, as w ell as t he
collection p rocedures, a re set as follows:
Registration f ees:
No. ·- (cid:127) · ·Types ·of stfucture . ' Amount ' (in _ Cf AF) .. .. ; (cid:127)'
. .(cid:127)'
1 Reference MYPC 25000
2 Regional MYPC 10 000
--..
--P-RE_S_lÿOÿE--N"'!"C'::"Eÿÿ-=-··--.......
54
PR


3 Divisional M YPC 7 500
4 lsub-divisional M YPC 5000
Course fees:
No.
Types of s tructure Amou n t (in CF A F)
1 Reference M YPC 100 0 00
2 Regional M YPC 75000
3 · Divisional MYPC 50 000
-
4 Sub-divisional M YPC l 25 0 00
y) P rovisions r elating t o the course f ees at t he N ational Centre for Y outh a nd S ports
in Kribi, f or a ll p ersons a dmitted f or training at t he CENAJES i n K ribi.
a) Any p ersan a dmitted for training a t t he C ENAJES of K ribi shall pay course
tees a t the N ational C entre for Youth a nd Sports in K ribi.
b) R egistration, course a nd a ccommodation t ees a t C ENAJES K ribi are f ixed as
follows:
- S tudent c ivil s ervant: CFAF 75 000 p er y ear;
www.prc.cm
- lndependent c andidate: C FAF 200 0 00 p er year;
- A ccommodation: C FAF 100 000 p er y ear.
z) Provisions r elating t o f ees for the i ssuance and r enewal o f t he Youth B iometric
Card.
a) Any y oung C ameroonian w ishing to o btain a Youth Biometric C ard must pay
the i ssuance and r enewal f ees o f the Youth B iometric C ard.
b) T he Y outh B iometric C ard issuance a nd renewal f ee is s et as f ollows:
- l ssuance: C FAF 10 0 00.
- R enewal: C FAF 10 0 00.
aa) The r entai c osts of t he M inistry of Y outh Affairs and C ivic E ducation's a nimation logistics
are set a ccording to t he scale in A ppendix 3 o f t his c hapter.
SECTION T HIRTY-lWO: P rovisions r elating to n on-tax r evenues from t he p ublic h ealth s ector.
1) Revenues f rom t he public h ealth s ector a re s ervice r evenues t hat a re n ormally
included i n the S tate budget.
2) Revenues f rom t he public h ealth s ector c omprise:
approval fees for food s upplements;
opening, o peration a nd r enewal c osts a s w ell a s f ines for t he s uspension
or withdrawal o f the approval o f a private h ygiene a nd/or s anitation company;
PRES!
55
IAT'G
R LEGISLATIVE
· M ENTARY
ATUTORYAFFAIR
_ _ RTlÿU:e !DfXSERVICf



=== Loi_2010-012_cybersecurite_cybercriminalite-en.pdf ===


REPUBLIC O F C AMEROON PEACE – WORK – HOMELAND
---------- ----------
LAW N °2010/012 O F D ECEMBER 21, 2010 RELATING
ON CYBERSECURITY AND C YBERCRIME
IN C AMEROON


2
FIRST T ITLE
GENERAL P ROVISIONS
Article 1 .- T his l aw g overns t he s ecurity f ramework f or electronic communications n etworks and
information s ystems, defines a nd punishes offenses r elated to t he u se o f i nformation a nd
communication technologies in C ameroon. In t his r espect, it aims in particular to:
- establish t rust in e lectronic c ommunications networks and information s ystems; - e stablish t he
legal r egime for digital e vidence and
security activities,
cryptography a nd e lectronic certification;
- protect the f undamental r ights o f natural p ersons, in particular the r ight t o h uman dignity,
honour a nd respect f or p rivate life, a s w ell as t he l egitimate interests of l egal p ersons.
Article 2 .- S pecific applications used i n m atters o f n ational d efense a nd s ecurity a re e xcluded from
the s cope o f this l aw.
Article 3 .- T he e lectronic c ommunications networks covered by t his l aw i nclude: s atellite networks, t errestrial
networks, e lectrical n etworks w hen they a re u sed f or the r outing o f e lectronic communications, networks
ensuring t he broadcasting o r distribution o f a udiovisual c ommunication services.
Article 4 .- W ithin the m eaning of this l aw a nd i ts implementing t exts, the following d efinitions a re
permitted:
1) Illegal a ccess: i ntentional a ccess, w ithout having the r ight t o d o s o, t o a ll or part o f a n e lectronic
communications network, a n information s ystem o r terminal e quipment;
2) Administration r esponsible f or T elecommunications: Ministry or Minister a s t he c ase m ay b e,
invested on b ehalf of t he Government w ith general competence over t he t elecommunications
and information and c ommunication technologies sector.
3) Algorithm: sequence o f elementary m athematical o perations t o b e a pplied
to data to achieve a desired r esult;
4) Asymmetric algorithm: e ncryption algorithm using a public key t o e ncrypt and a private
(different) k ey to decrypt messages;
5) Symmetric algorithm: e ncryption a lgorithm using the s ame k ey t o e ncrypt and d ecrypt
messages;
6) Active a ttack: act modifying or a ltering t he r esources t argeted b y t he a ttack (attack on t he
integrity, availability and confidentiality of d ata);
7) Passive attack: a ct that d oes not a lter its target (passive listening, breach of c onfidentiality);


3
8) Damage t o i ntegrity: intentionally causing a serious disruption or interruption of
the operation o f an i nformation system, an electronic c ommunications network
or terminal equipment, b y i ntroducing, transmitting, d amaging, e rasing,
deteriorating, m odifying, d eleting o r making i naccessible data;
9) Security audit: methodical e xamination o f the components a nd a ctors o f security,
policy, measures, s olutions, p rocedures and m eans i mplemented b y a n
organization, t o s ecure its environment, carry out c ompliance c hecks,
assessment checks o f the a dequacy o f the means ( organizational, t echnical,
human, f inancial) invested w ith regard t o the risks incurred, o ptimization,
rationality and performance.
10) A uthentication: s ecurity c riterion defined by a process i mplemented i n p articular
to verify t he i dentity o f a n atural or l egal person a nd e nsure that t he identity
provided c orresponds t o t he identity of this p erson previously registered;
11) C ertification Authority: trusted a uthority responsible for c reating a nd a ssigning
public and private k eys as w ell as e lectronic c ertificates;
12) R oot C ertification Authority: B ody e ntrusted w ith the m ission o f accrediting
certification a uthorities, validating t he certification p olicy of accredited
certification a uthorities, a nd v erifying a nd s igning their r espective c ertificates;
13) E lectronic c ertificate: e lectronic d ocument s ecured by t he electronic s ignature o f
the p erson who issued i t a nd who a ttests, a fter verification, t he v eracity of i ts
content;
14) Q ualified electronic c ertificate: e lectronic c ertificate i ssued by a n approved
certification a uthority;
15) E lectronic c ertification: i ssue o f electronic c ertificate
16) E ncryption: a p rocess by w hich, using a secret c onvention c alled a key, c lear
information is t ransformed into information t hat i s unintelligible to third p arties
who d o not h ave k nowledge of the key;
17) K ey: in a n encryption s ystem, it c orresponds t o a mathematical value, a word, a
sentence, w hich allows, t hanks to the encryption algorithm, t o encrypt o r
decrypt a m essage;
18) P rivate key: key u sed i n a symmetric encryption mechanisms ( or p ublic key
encryption), which belongs t o an entity and m ust be secret;
19) P ublic key: key u sed t o e ncrypt a message i n a system
asymmetrical a nd therefore freely d iffused;
20) S ecret k ey: key k nown t o t he sender and t he r ecipient u sed f or e ncrypting and
decrypting messages and using t he symmetric encryption mechanism;


4
21) Source c ode: s et of technical specifications, without restriction o f access or
implementation, of a software o r c ommunication, interconnection, exchange
protocol or a d ata f ormat;
22) Audiovisual c ommunication: communication t o the p ublic of services of
television a nd sound b roadcasting;
23) Electronic c ommunication: emission, t ransmission or r eception o f signs, signals,
writings, i mages o r s ounds, by e lectromagnetic m eans;
24) Confidentiality: maintaining t he s ecrecy of information and t ransactions i n order t o
prevent u nauthorized disclosure o f information to non-recipients a llowing reading,
listening, i llicit copying o f intentional o r a ccidental o rigin during their storage,
processing or t ransfer;
25) Content: s et o f information r elating to data belonging to natural or l egal p ersons,
transmitted or received t hrough e lectronic c ommunications n etworks a nd
Information Systems;
26) Illegal c ontent: c ontent t hat violates h uman dignity, p rivacy, honor o r n ational
security;
27) Electronic m ail: a m essage, i n the f orm o f text, voice, s ound o r i mage, sent over a
public communications n etwork, s tored on a network s erver or i n the r ecipient's
terminal e quipment, u ntil t he r ecipient retrieves it;
28) Encryption: u se of unusual c odes or s ignals allowing t he c onversion o f information
to b e t ransmitted into s ignals that a re i ncomprehensible t o third p arties;
29) Cryptanalysis: s et o f means which makes it possible t o analyze p reviously
encrypted i nformation w ith a v iew t o decrypting i t;
30) Cryptogram: E ncrypted o r coded m essage;
31) Cryptography: a pplication of mathematics t o write information i n such a way a s to
make it u nintelligible to those w ho do n ot h ave t he a bility to decipher i t;
32) Cybercrime: a ll offenses committed through cyberspace by m eans other t han
those u sually u sed, and i n a manner c omplementary to traditional c rime;
33) Cybersecurity: a set of prevention, p rotection a nd d eterrence m easures o f a
technical, organizational, legal, f inancial, human, p rocedural n ature a nd o ther
actions e nabling t he a chievement o f the s ecurity o bjectives s et t hrough electronic
communications networks, i nformation s ystems and f or t he p rotection o f the
privacy of individuals;
34) Declaration o f certification p ractices: s et o f practices (organization, o perational
procedures, t echnical and human r esources) t hat t he c ompetent c ertification
authority applies in the c ontext of the p rovision of this service a nd i n a ccordance
with the certification policy(ies) that i t has u ndertaken t o respect;


5
35) D ecryption: r everse o peration o f e ncryption;
36) D enial o f service: a ttack b y s aturation o f a r esource of t he i nformation s ystem o r
the electronic c ommunications network, so that i t c ollapses a nd c an n o longer
perform the s ervices expected o f i t;
37) D istributed d enial o f service: s imultaneous a ttack on the r esources o f t he
information s ystem o r the e lectronic c ommunications network, in o rder t o
saturate t hem and a mplify the h indering e ffects;
38) A vailability: s ecurity c riterion enabling t he r esources o f e lectronic c ommunications
networks, i nformation s ystems o r t erminal e quipment to b e accessible and
usable as r equired (the t ime factor);
39) E lectronic s ignature c reation d evice: set o f p rivate encryption equipment a nd/or
software, a pproved by a c ompetent a uthority, c onfigured for the c reation of an
electronic signature;
40) E lectronic s ignature v erification d evice”: s et o f p ublic encryption equipment and/
or software, a pproved b y a c ompetent a uthority, a llowing v erification by a
certification a uthority of an e lectronic s ignature;
41) D ata: r epresentation of facts, i nformation o r c oncepts i n a f orm capable o f b eing
processed b y t erminal equipment, including a p rogram enabling t he l atter t o
perform a f unction;
42) C onnection d ata: s et o f data relating t o t he a ccess process in a n electronic
communication;
43) " Traffic d ata: d ata relating t o an electronic c ommunication i ndicating t he o rigin,
destination, r oute, t ime, date, size a nd duration o f t he c ommunication or t he
type of u nderlying service;
44) T erminal e quipment: d evice, installation o r s et o f i nstallations i ntended t o b e
connected t o an e ndpoint o f a n information s ystem and t ransmitting, receiving,
processing o r storing i nformation d ata;
45) R eliability: a bility of an i nformation s ystem or a t elecommunications network t o
operate w ithout i ncident for a s ufficiently long time;
46) P rovider o f electronic c ommunications s ervices: natural o r l egal person p roviding
services consisting e ntirely o r m ainly of t he p rovision o f e lectronic c ommunications;
47) S everity o f impact: a ssessment o f t he l evel of s everity o f a n incident,
weighted b y i ts f requency o f o ccurrence;
48) D ata integrity: security c riterion d efining t he s tate of a n electronic c ommunications
network, an information s ystem or t erminal e quipment w hich h as r emained
intact and m akes i t possible to e nsure that the r esources h ave not b een a ltered
(modified o r d estroyed) either intentionally or a ccidentally, so as to e nsure their
accuracy, r eliability and d urability;


6
49) I llegal i nterception: a ccess w ithout r ight o r authorization t o d ata on a n electronic
communications network, a n i nformation s ystem o r terminal e quipment;
50) L awful interception: a uthorized access t o d ata o n an e lectronic c ommunications
network, a n information s ystem or terminal e quipment
51) I ntrusion by i nterest: intentional a nd unauthorized a ccess t o an e lectronic
communications n etwork o r an i nformation system, w ith the a im o f e ither c ausing
harm o r g aining a n economic, f inancial, i ndustrial, security or sovereignty b enefit;
52) I ntellectual challenge i ntrusion: intentional a nd unauthorized a ccess t o a n
electronic communications network o r an information s ystem, with the a im of
meeting an intellectual challenge t hat can contribute t o i mproving the
performance o f the organization's security s ystem;
53) D eceptive s oftware: software t hat performs o perations o n a u ser's t erminal
equipment without f irst informing the u ser o f the e xact n ature o f the o perations
that the software will p erform o n h is terminal e quipment o r without asking t he
user i f h e consents t o the software performing t hese o perations;
54) S pyware: a p articular type o f deceptive s oftware t hat collects personal i nformation
(most visited w ebsites, p asswords, etc.) f rom a u ser o f the e lectronic
communications n etwork;
55) P otentially u nwanted software: s oftware t hat exhibits c haracteristics of d eceptive
software o r s pyware;
56) C lear m essage”: i ntelligible version of a m essage and understandable b y
all ;
57) C ryptographic m eans: e quipment or software designed o r modified to transform
data, whether information o r signals, u sing s ecret conventions o r to perform an
inverse o peration w ith or w ithout a s ecret convention in order to guarantee t he
security of the storage or transmission of d ata, a nd to ensure t heir c onfidentiality
and t he control o f their i ntegrity;
58) N on-repudiation: s ecurity criterion ensuring t he a vailability o f e vidence that can
be used a gainst a t hird party a nd used to p rove t he t raceability of an electronic
communication t hat h as taken place;
59) C ertification p olicy: a s et of i dentified r ules d efining the r equirements w ith which
the certification a uthority complies i n the i mplementation of its s ervices and
indicating t he applicability of a c ertification service to a p articular c ommunity
and/or a c lass of applications with common security requirements;
60) S ecurity p olicy: s ecurity framework established b y a n organization, r eflecting its
security strategy a nd s pecifying the m eans o f achieving i t;
61) C ryptography s ervice: operation aimed at the i mplementation, for
the account o f others, means of c ryptography;


7
62) E lectronic c ommunications network: T ransmission systems, active or p assive, and,
where a pplicable, s witching a nd routing e quipment a nd o ther resources that
enable t he routing o f signals by cable, r adio, optical o r o ther electromagnetic
means, i ncluding s atellite n etworks, fixed t errestrial networks (with c ircuit or p acket
switching, i ncluding t he Internet) and m obile networks, s ystems u sing the electrical
network, i nsofar a s they are u sed f or t he transmission of signals, networks u sed
for sound a nd television b roadcasting a nd c able television networks, regardless
of the t ype of i nformation transmitted;
63) T elecommunications network: i nstallation o r s et o f installations ensuring either t he
transmission a nd routing o f telecommunications signals, or t he exchange of
control a nd management i nformation a ssociated w ith t hese s ignals b etween t he
points of this network; 6 4) Security: s ituation in w hich s omeone o r
something i s not exposed t o any d anger. M echanism i ntended to p revent a h armful
event, o r to limit its e ffects;
65) C ertification service: s ervice p rovided b y a c ertification authority
certification;
66) E lectronic c ommunications service: s ervice consisting e ntirely o r m ainly o f t he
provision o f electronic c ommunications excluding t he contents o f audiovisual
communications services;
67) S ignatory: n atural person, a cting o n h is own behalf or o n b ehalf of the natural or
legal p erson h e represents, w ho u ses a n e lectronic signature c reation d evice;
68) E lectronic s ignature: s ignature obtained by an a symmetric encryption algorithm
allowing t he s ender o f a m essage to b e a uthenticated a nd i ts i ntegrity to be
verified;
69) A dvanced e lectronic s ignature: e lectronic signature o btained at
using a qualified e lectronic certificate;
70) O pen standard: c ommunication, interconnection o r exchange p rotocol and interoperable d ata format, the
technical specifications o f which a re p ublic and without restriction o f a ccess o r implementation;
71) D etection s ystem: s ystem f or d etecting i ncidents that c ould lead t o violations o f t he
security policy and for d iagnosing p otential i ntrusions;
72) I nformation s ystem: i solated d evice o r g roup o f interconnected or r elated d evices,
ensuring by itself or by one or m ore of its e lements, i n a ccordance w ith a p rogram,
automated processing o f data;
73) V ulnerability: a s ecurity flaw r esulting e ither i ntentionally o r a ccidentally i n a
violation o f the security p olicy, i n


8
the architecture o f a n e lectronic c ommunications network, in t he design of a n information system.
Article 5.- T he t erms and e xpressions n ot d efined i n t his law retain their d efinitions or meanings g iven b y t he
international l egal instruments t o w hich the S tate o f C ameroon has subscribed, in p articular, t he Constitution
and t he Convention o f t he International T elecommunications U nion, the Radio Regulations a nd t he
International T elecommunications R egulations.
TITLE I I
CYBERSECURITY
CHAPTER I
OF T HE G ENERAL ELECTRONIC S ECURITY P OLICY
Article 6.- T he A dministration responsible for Telecommunications d evelops a nd i mplements the electronic
communications security policy, t aking into a ccount technological developments a nd the Government's
priorities i n t his a rea.
In t his c apacity, s he:
ÿ e nsures t he promotion of t he security o f e lectronic communications n etworks and information s ystems
as w ell as m onitoring t he development o f i ssues r elated t o s ecurity a nd certification a ctivities;
ÿ c oordinates a t t he national l evel activities contributing t o t he security a nd protection o f e lectronic
communications networks and i nformation systems;
ÿ e nsures t he establishment o f a n a dequate f ramework for the security o f e lectronic c ommunications;
ÿ e stablishes t he l ist o f c ertification a uthorities;
ÿ e nsures t he representation o f C ameroon in i nternational b odies responsible for activities r elated t o
the security and p rotection o f e lectronic c ommunications n etworks and information s ystems.
CHAPTER I I
ON THE REGULATION AND M ONITORING OF ELECTRONIC SECURITY A CTIVITIES
Article 7.- ( 1) The National Agency for Information a nd Communication Technologies, hereinafter r eferred t o
as the Agency, established b y t he law governing e lectronic communications i n C ameroon, is r esponsible for
the regulation o f e lectronic s ecurity activities, i n c ollaboration w ith the Telecommunications R egulatory A gency.


9
(2) The A gency p rovided f or i n paragraph 1 a bove, ensures, on behalf of t he State, the
regulation, c ontrol a nd monitoring o f activities r elated t o the security o f information s ystems a nd
electronic c ommunications n etworks, a nd to e lectronic certification. In t his c apacity, i ts m issions
include in p articular:
- to p rocess a ccreditation applications a nd prepare t he specifications of the certification
authorities a nd submit t hem f or s ignature to t he Minister r esponsible f or Telecommunications;
- to c heck the conformity o f e lectronic signatures issued;
ÿ t o p articipate i n the development of the national policy on the security of e lectronic
communications and c ertification n etworks; ÿ t o i ssue a n advisory o pinion on
texts relating t o its field of
skill ;
- to m onitor the security a ctivities o f e lectronic communications n etworks, information a nd
certification s ystems;
- to p rocess a pplications for a pproval of cryptographic m eans and to i ssue a pproval certificates
for s ecurity e quipment;
ÿ t o p repare m utual recognition a greements w ith f oreign parties and submit t hem for signature
to t he M inister r esponsible for
Telecommunications;
- to e nsure technological m onitoring and issue a lerts and recommendations regarding t he
security of electronic c ommunications networks a nd certification;
ÿ t o p articipate i n research, t raining and study a ctivities relating to the security o f electronic
communications n etworks, information s ystems a nd certification;
- to e nsure the regularity and effectiveness o f information s ystems s ecurity a udits i n
accordance w ith relevant s tandards of p ublic bodies and certification a uthorities;
ÿ t o e nsure m onitoring, d etection a nd information o n IT and cybercrime risks;
- t o carry out a ny o ther mission o f general i nterest t hat may be entrusted to it
the supervisory a uthority.
(3) A d ecree of the Prime Minister specifies the m ethods o f a pplication
of t he p rovisions o f paragraph 1 a bove.
Article 8.- ( 1) The A gency i s the Root C ertification A uthority.
(2) The A gency i s the certifying a uthority of the Administration
Public.


10
Article 9.- (1) Accredited certification authorities, security a uditors, security s oftware publishers and
other approved security s ervice p roviders a re subject to the payment of a contribution o f 1.5% o f
their turnover e xcluding tax, i ntended t o f inance a fund c alled the “Special Fund for E lectronic
Security A ctivities”, for the f inancing o f r esearch, development, t raining and studies in t he field o f
cybersecurity.
(2) T he resources r eferred t o in paragraph 1 above a re recovered b y
the Agency a nd d eposited in a n account o pened a t the Central B ank.
(3) A Committee is hereby established t o validate priority r esearch, development,
training a nd s tudy projects i n cybersecurity.
The operating p rocedures of this Committee a re s et out in a
regulatory t ext.
(4) The Minister r esponsible f or Telecommunications is the authorising officer
for e xpenditure i ncurred f rom t he f und referred to in paragraph 1 above.
(5) T he conditions a nd methods o f collecting and managing this fee are d efined b y
regulation.
CHAPTER III
ON THE LEGAL REGIME OF C ERTIFICATION A CTIVITIES
Article 10.- E lectronic certification activity i s subject to prior a uthorization. I t i s carried o ut by
certification a uthorities.
Article 1 1.- The following m ay be subject to a uthorization:
ÿ the establishment a nd operation of an infrastructure for t he purpose o f issuing, storing a nd
delivering qualified e lectronic c ertificates;
ÿ making available to t he p ublic t he public keys o f all
users.
Article 12.- T he c onditions a nd procedures f or g ranting the authorization r eferred to in A rticle 1 0
above are s et b y r egulation.
CHAPTER IV
SECURITY A CTIVITIES
Article 13.- ( 1) Electronic c ommunications n etworks and information systems, o perators, c ertification
authorities a nd p roviders o f e lectronic c ommunications services a re subject to a m andatory security
audit.
(2) T he conditions a nd procedures f or t he security a udit provided for i n p aragraph 1
above are d efined b y regulation.
Article 14.- T he A gency's staff a nd e xperts appointed t o carry o ut audit operations a re bound b y
professional secrecy.


11
CHAPTER V
OF E LECTRONIC C ERTIFICATION
Article 1 5.- ( 1) Qualified e lectronic certificates a re only valid for t he purposes f or w hich
they were i ssued.
(2) T he d evices f or c reating a nd v erifying q ualified c ertificates a re
technologically neutral, s tandardized, a pproved a nd i nteroperable.
Article 1 6.- ( 1) Certification a uthorities a re liable for d amage c aused t o persons who
have r elied o n c ertificates p resented b y t hem a s q ualified i n e ach of the following c ases:
ÿ the information c ontained i n t he certificate, on t he date of its issue,
were inaccurate;
ÿ the data r equired for t he certificate to be c onsidered as
qualified w ere i ncomplete;
ÿ the issue of the q ualified c ertificate d id n ot give rise t o verification t hat t he
signatory h olds t he p rivate agreement corresponding t o the public agreement
of this certificate;
ÿ the certification a uthorities and c ertification providers h ave not, w here a pplicable,
registered t he r evocation of the qualified c ertificate a nd m ade t his i nformation
available t o third p arties.
(2) C ertification authorities shall n ot b e l iable f or d amage caused b y use of the q ualified
certificate e xceeding t he limits set f or i ts use o r t he v alue o f t he t ransactions f or w hich it m ay b e u sed,
provided t hat t hese l imits a re included i n t he q ualified certificate a nd a re a ccessible to u sers.
(3) C ertification a uthorities m ust p rovide e vidence o f sufficient financial
security, s pecifically a llocated to t he payment of sums they may owe to p ersons w ho
have reasonably relied o n t he qualified c ertificates t hey issue, o r insurance c overing
the financial consequences o f t heir professional civil l iability.
CHAPTER VI
OF T HE ELECTRONIC S IGNATURE
Article 1 7.- T he advanced electronic s ignature h as t he same legal v alue as t he
handwritten s ignature a nd p roduces t he same effects as t he latter.
Article 1 8.- A n advanced electronic s ignature m ust m eet t he following conditions:
ÿ the data r elating to t he c reation of the signature a re linked e xclusively t o the
signatory a nd a re u nder his exclusive c ontrol;
ÿ any modification made t o it i s easily detectable;


12
- it i s created u sing a s ecure d evice whose t echnical c haracteristics a re set o ut in a t ext from t he
Minister r esponsible for T elecommunications;
ÿ t he certificate used to generate t he s ignature is a qualified certificate. A t ext from t he M inister
responsible f or Telecommunications s ets out t he q ualification criteria for certificates.
CHAPTER VII
ELECTRONIC C ERTIFICATES AND SIGNATURES ISSUED
BY T HE CERTIFICATION A UTHORITIES
Article 1 9.- The certification a uthority having c onferred v alidity o n an electronic certificate cannot r enounce
it.
Article 2 0.- (1) A n e lectronic c ertificate i ssued outside t he national t erritory p roduces t he s ame l egal e ffects
as a qualified certificate i ssued i n Cameroon provided t hat t here is a n act o f r ecognition o f t he i ssuing
authority signed by t he Minister responsible f or Telecommunications.
(2) T he i nteroperability of q ualified electronic certificates is
regulated b y a text f rom the M inister responsible f or Telecommunications.
CHAPTER VIII
OF T HE ELECTRONIC D OCUMENT
Article 2 1.- Any person wishing t o affix t heir electronic signature t o a d ocument m ay create this s ignature
using a reliable device w hose t echnical characteristics a re set o ut i n a t ext from t he M inister responsible
for T elecommunications.
Article 2 2.- Any person using an e lectronic s ignature d evice must:
- take the minimum precautions s et o ut in t he text referred t o i n Article 21 above, i n order t o
avoid a ny illegal use o f the encryption e lements or p ersonal equipment r elating t o i ts
signature;
- inform the certification a uthority of a ny illegitimate u se o f i ts signature;
- ensure t he veracity o f a ll data that it has d eclared to t he electronic certification s ervice p rovider
and t o any person t o whom i t has asked to r ely o n its signature.
Article 2 3.- In t he e vent o f f ailure t o comply with the c ommitments provided f or in A rticle 22 above, t he
holder o f t he signature i s liable for a ny damage caused t o o thers.


13
CHAPTER IX
ON THE P ROTECTION O F ELECTRONIC C OMMUNICATIONS N ETWORKS,
INFORMATION S YSTEMS AND P ERSONAL PRIVACY
SECTION I
ON THE PROTECTION O F E LECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS
Article 2 4.- Operators o f electronic c ommunications networks a nd providers o f e lectronic
communications services must take a ll n ecessary t echnical and administrative m easures t o
guarantee t he security of the s ervices offered. To t his e nd, they a re required to i nform u sers:
- the danger i ncurred i n t he e vent o f u se o f t heir n etworks;
- specific r isks o f security b reaches, including distributed d enial of s ervice, a bnormal
rerouting, t raffic s pikes, unusual t raffic and ports, passive and active e avesdropping,
intrusions a nd any other risk;
- the existence of technical m eans t o e nsure t he
security o f their c ommunications.
Article 2 5.- ( 1) Network operators a nd providers o f e lectronic c ommunications services h ave t he
obligation t o retain connection a nd t raffic d ata for a p eriod of t en (10) years.
(2) Network operators a nd electronic c ommunications service providers s hall
install mechanisms f or m onitoring data traffic o n t heir n etworks. T his data may be accessible during
judicial investigations.
(3) The l iability of n etwork o perators and providers o f e lectronic c ommunications
services is incurred if t he u se of d ata provided f or i n paragraph 2 a bove i nfringes the individual
freedoms o f users.
SECTION II
ON T HE PROTECTION OF INFORMATION S YSTEMS
Article 2 6.- ( 1) I nformation s ystem o perators s hall t ake a ll t echnical and a dministrative measures to e nsure
the security of the services o ffered. To t his end, t hey s hall e quip t hemselves with standardized s ystems
enabling them to identify, e valuate, p rocess and continuously m anage the risks l inked t o t he security of
information s ystems in t he context o f the services offered d irectly o r indirectly.
(2) Information system operators shall implement technical mechanisms to d eal
with attacks detrimental t o t he permanent a vailability of t he systems, t heir i ntegrity, their
authentication, t heir n on-repudiation by t hird-party users, t he confidentiality o f d ata and physical
security.


14
(3) T he m echanisms provided f or in paragraph 2 a bove are subject t o approval a nd
proper v isa by the Agency.
(4) I nformation s ystem p latforms are p rotected against p ossible r adiation a nd
intrusions w hich could c ompromise t he integrity o f the transmitted d ata a nd against a ny o ther
external a ttack, i n p articular b y an intrusion detection s ystem.
Article 2 7.- Legal entities w hose a ctivity i s t o provide a ccess t o information s ystems are r equired t o
inform u sers:
- the danger involved i n t he use of information s ystems
unsecured, e specially f or individuals;
- the need to i nstall parental c ontrol d evices;
- specific risks o f security breaches, in particular the generic f amily o f viruses;
- the existence of t echnical m eans t o restrict a ccess t o certain s ervices and to offer them
at l east o ne of t hese m eans, i n particular the use o f the most recent o perating
systems, antivirus t ools and tools against s pyware and deceptive software, the
activation of p ersonal firewalls, intrusion detection s ystems and the activation of
automatic updates.
Article 2 8.- (1) O perators o f i nformation s ystems s hall i nform users of the prohibition on using the
electronic c ommunications network to d isseminate i llegal content o r any o ther a ct which may
undermine t he security of n etworks or information s ystems.
(2) T he p rohibition a lso covers the design o f deceptive software, spyware, p otentially
unwanted s oftware or any o ther t ool l eading to fraudulent behavior.
Article 2 9.- (1) O perators o f i nformation s ystems a re required t o retain the connection a nd traffic
data o f their information s ystems f or a period o f ten (10) y ears.
(2) Operators of i nformation s ystems are r equired t o install monitoring m echanisms
to control a ccess t o d ata i n t heir information s ystems. T he s tored data m ay b e accessible d uring
judicial investigations.
(3) The installations of i nformation s ystems operators may b e subject t o search o r
seizure b y o rder of a judicial authority u nder t he conditions provided f or b y the laws and regulations
in f orce.
Article 3 0.- (1) I nformation s ystems operators s hall evaluate, r eview t heir s ecurity systems and,
where n ecessary, introduce a ppropriate changes t o their s ecurity p ractices, m easures and
techniques i n line w ith technological developments.


15
(2) O perators of i nformation s ystems a nd their users m ay c ooperate w ith
each other i n the d evelopment a nd i mplementation o f security p ractices, measures a nd
techniques for their systems.
Article 31.- ( 1) P roviders o f c ontent i n e lectronic communications n etworks a nd
information s ystems a re required to e nsure t he a vailability of c ontent, as well as that o f
data stored i n their facilities.
(2) T hey have a n o bligation to i mplement filters to deal w ith h armful a ttacks o n p ersonal
data and t he p rivacy o f u sers.
Article 32.- ( 1) E lectronic communications n etworks a nd information systems a re s ubject
to a m andatory a nd p eriodic s ecurity a udit regime of t heir security s ystems b y the A gency.
(2) T he s afety a udit a nd s everity i mpact measurements are c arried out
annually o r when c ircumstances require.
(3) A udit r eports are confidential a nd addressed to t he M inister
responsible f or T elecommunications.
(4) A t ext f rom the M inister r esponsible f or Telecommunications sets o ut
the conditions f or assessing t he s everity i mpact levels.
SECTION III
OBLIGATIONS OF ACCESS, SERVICE AND CONTENT P ROVIDERS
Article 33.- P ersons whose a ctivity i s t o o ffer access t o electronic communications
services s hall inform t heir s ubscribers of t he e xistence o f t echnical means enabling t hem
to r estrict access to c ertain services o r t o s elect them and shall offer them a t l east o ne
of t hese means.
Article 34.- ( 1) T he liability o f p ersons who ensure, even free o f c harge, t he s torage of
signals, writings, i mages, sounds o r messages o f a ny nature p rovided b y the r ecipients
of t hese services, m ay b e i ncurred.
(2) H owever, t he l iability p rovided for i n p aragraph 1 above i s n ot
point e ngaged i n the f ollowing c ases:
- the p ersons did n ot a ctually have k nowledge o f t heir illicit n ature o r o f facts
and c ircumstances r evealing this n ature;
- if, f rom the m oment t hey b ecame a ware of t he f acts, they acted p romptly t o
remove t his d ata o r make a ccess t o i t impossible.
Article 35.- ( 1) T he persons mentioned i n A rticles 33 and 34 above a re r equired t o keep,
for a p eriod o f t en ( 10) years, d ata a llowing the i dentification o f a ny person h aving
contributed t o t he c reation o f the c ontent o f the s ervices o f w hich t hey are p roviders.


16
(2) T hey p rovide p ersons who p ublish an e lectronic c ommunications s ervice w ith technical
means e nabling t hem t o s atisfy t he identification c onditions provided for i n A rticles 3 7 a nd 38 b elow.
(3) T he judicial a uthority may request c ommunication f rom t he service p roviders
mentioned i n A rticles 3 3 and 3 4 above of the data p rovided f or i n paragraph 1 a bove.
Article 3 6.- The competent c ourt s eized shall rule w ithin a maximum p eriod of thirty (30) d ays on
all m easures l ikely t o p revent d amage or to put an end t o damage c aused b y the content of an
electronic c ommunications service.
Article 3 7.- Persons w hose a ctivity c onsists of publishing a n electronic communications s ervice,
make available t o t he public:
- their surname, f irst n ames, a ddress a nd t elephone number a nd, i f t hey a re s ubject to
the formalities o f r egistration in the trade a nd p ersonal property r egister, t heir
registration n umber, if they a re n atural p ersons;
- their name o r business n ame a nd r egistered o ffice, their t elephone number a nd, i f t hey
are l egal entities s ubject t o t he formalities o f registration i n the trade a nd p ersonal
property r egister, t heir registration n umber, t heir s hare capital, t he address o f t heir
registered o ffice, if they are l egal e ntities;
- the name of t he director or co-director o f the publication and, w here applicable
where applicable, t hat o f t he editorial manager;
- the name, denomination or business n ame, address a nd t elephone number o f the
service provider mentioned i n Articles 3 3 and 3 4.
Article 3 8.- (1) Persons publishing an electronic c ommunications service o n a non-professional
basis m ay only m ake a vailable t o t he public t he name, denomination o r business n ame and
address o f t he provider.
(2) T he p ersons mentioned i n Articles 3 3 and 3 4 above are
subject t o p rofessional s ecrecy.
Article 3 9.- (1) Any p erson who i s t he victim o f defamation b y means o f an electronic communications
service h as a right of r eply a nd m ay demand t hat i t be rectified.
(2) T he conditions for i nclusion of the right o f reply are t hose
provided f or by the texts in f orce.
Article 4 0.- (1) Any p erson carrying o ut an a ctivity o f transmitting c ontent o n an electronic
communications network o r providing a ccess to an electronic communications network m ay o nly
be h eld l iable when:
- it is t he origin o f t he disputed t ransmission request;


17
- i t selects or modifies t he contents which a re the subject o f t he
transmission.
(2) A ny person carrying out, f or the sole p urpose o f m aking t heir s ubsequent t ransmission
more efficient, a n a ctivity of a utomatic, intermediate and t emporary s torage of the content t hat a service
provider t ransmits, c annot b e h eld civilly o r c riminally liable f or this content u nless they have m odified
this c ontent, h ave not complied with t heir conditions o f a ccess and t he usual r ules c oncerning t heir
updating or have hindered the lawful and u sual u se of the technology used t o o btain t he data.
SECTION IV
ON T HE P ROTECTION OF T HE P RIVACY OF I NDIVIDUALS
Article 41.- E veryone h as the right t o respect f or their p rivate l ife. J udges m ay take p recautionary
measures, i ncluding sequestration a nd s eizure, to p revent or s top an i nvasion o f privacy.
Article 42.- T he c onfidentiality o f communications r outed t hrough e lectronic c ommunications n etworks
and i nformation s ystems, i ncluding t raffic d ata, i s ensured b y t he operators and m anagers o f e lectronic
communications networks and i nformation s ystems.
Article 43.- T he c ontent p rovider i s r esponsible f or the content c onveyed b y i ts information s ystem,
particularly w hen this c ontent infringes o n human d ignity, h onour and p rivacy.
Article 44.- ( 1) Any n atural o r legal p erson i s prohibited from listening t o, i ntercepting, storing
communications and r elated t raffic data, o r subjecting t hem to a ny other means o f i nterception o r
surveillance, without t he consent of t he users c oncerned, e xcept when t hat p erson i s legally authorized
to do so.
(2) However, technical storage prior to t he routing o f a ny communication is authorized
for operators and o perators of e lectronic c ommunications networks, w ithout prejudice t o t he principle of
confidentiality.
Article 45.- T he r ecording o f c ommunications a nd r elated t raffic data, carried out in a professional context
with a view t o providing digital proof of a n e lectronic c ommunication is authorized.
Article 46.- ( 1) Providers o f content f or e lectronic c ommunications n etworks and i nformation s ystems a re
required to retain t he content a nd d ata stored in t heir f acilities f or a period o f t en (10) years.


18
(2) Providers o f c ontent f or e lectronic communications n etworks and i nformation s ystems a re
required t o i mplement f ilters to deal with h armful attacks o n personal d ata a nd t he privacy of u sers.
Article 4 7.- T he u se of e lectronic communications n etworks and i nformation s ystems f or the purpose of
storing i nformation o r a ccessing i nformation s tored i n t erminal e quipment o f a natural o r legal person m ay
only b e d one w ith t heir prior consent.
Article 4 8.- ( 1) T he t ransmission of e lectronic messages f or prospecting purposes b y c oncealing the i dentity
of t he s ender i n whose n ame t he communication is made, or without i ndicating a valid a ddress t o which t he
recipient c an send a r equest t o obtain t he cessation of t his information i s prohibited.
(2) S ending e lectronic m essages by i mpersonating
of o thers is p rohibited.
SECTION V
INTERCEPTION OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS
Article 4 9.- N otwithstanding the provisions o f the Code of C riminal P rocedure, in t he event o f crimes or
offenses provided f or i n this law, t he Judicial P olice O fficer may i ntercept, r ecord o r transcribe a ny e lectronic
communication.
Article 5 0.- I f o perators o f e lectronic c ommunications networks o r providers o f e lectronic c ommunications
services encode, c ompress o r c ipher t he transmitted d ata, t he corresponding i nterceptions a re provided i n
clear t ext to t he services w hich requested t hem.
Article 5 1.- T he p ersonnel of o perators of e lectronic communications networks o r providers o f e lectronic
communications services are b ound b y professional secrecy with r egard t o the requisitions received.
TITLE III
CYBERCRIME
CHAPTER I
PROVISIONS O F PROCESSUAL L AW
Article 5 2.- ( 1) I n t he e vent of a cyber offense, t he Judicial P olice O fficers with g eneral jurisdiction and t he
authorized agents of t he Agency s hall carry out i nvestigations i n a ccordance with t he provisions of the C ode
of C riminal P rocedure.
(2) B efore taking up t heir d uties, the authorized a gents o f the A gency shall t ake a n o ath
before t he c ompetent C ourt o f First I nstance, in t he following form: " I s wear to faithfully fulfill my d uties a nd
to o bserve in all respects t he duties imposed upon me, a nd t o keep s ecret t he i nformation o f which I h ave
become aware d uring o r i n t he exercise o f m y duties."


19
(3) J udicial P olice O fficers and a uthorized a gents of t he A gency may, d uring investigations,
access m eans of transport, a ny premises u sed f or p rofessional p urposes, e xcluding p rivate h omes, i n order
to search f or and n ote offenses, request t he communication of a ll professional documents and t ake copies
thereof, a nd c ollect, upon summons o r o n s ite, information and j ustifications.
Article 5 3.- ( 1) Searches i n cybercrime m atters m ay involve data w hich may be p hysical m edia o r c opies
made i n the p resence of p ersons a ttending t he s earch.
(2) W hen a c opy o f the seized data h as been m ade, it m ay b e d estroyed o n t he i nstructions
of the P ublic Prosecutor for s ecurity reasons.
(3) W ith t he agreement o f t he P ublic P rosecutor, o nly objects, documents and d ata u sed to
establish t he t ruth w ill be k ept u nder s eal by t he J udicial P olice O fficer.
(4) P ersons present during t he s earch m ay b e r equired t o p rovide i nformation on t he o bjects,
documents a nd data seized.
Article 5 4.- S earches a nd seizures are carried o ut i n accordance w ith t he p rovisions o f the C ode o f Criminal
Procedure, t aking i nto a ccount t he deterioration of e vidence.
Article 5 5.- ( 1) When i t appears t hat the data s eized o r o btained during the i nvestigation or i nquiry h ave been
subject t o transformation o perations preventing a ccess to t he u nencrypted version or a re l ikely t o c ompromise
the i nformation t hey c ontain, t he Public P rosecutor, t he E xamining Magistrate or t he t rial c ourt may requisition
any qualified n atural or l egal p erson to c arry o ut t he t echnical o perations e nabling t he u nencrypted version of
said data t o be obtained.
(2) W here a m eans of cryptography h as been u sed, the j udicial a uthorities may r equire t he
secret a greement f or d ecrypting the cryptogram.
Article 56.- T he r equisition p rovided f or i n A rticle 50 a bove m ay be m ade to any
expert. I n t his case, i ts execution is c arried o ut in a ccordance with the p rovisions o f
the C ode o f C riminal Procedure r elating t o the commission o f experts.
Article 5 7.- ( 1) The C ameroonian j udicial a uthorities m ay issue a n ational o r i nternational letter of r equest to
any l egal o r natural p erson to s earch f or the constituent elements of cybercrime o ffences, a t least o ne o f the
constituent e lements o f w hich was committed o n C ameroonian t erritory o r o ne o f t he p erpetrators o r
accomplices of which is located i n the said territory.


20
(2) S ubject t o t he r ules o f reciprocity b etween C ameroon and foreign c ountries bound
by a j udicial cooperation a greement, l etters r ogatory a re executed in accordance w ith the p rovisions
of the C ode o f Criminal P rocedure.
Article 5 8.- ( 1) N atural o r l egal p ersons who p rovide cryptography s ervices a imed a t ensuring a
confidentiality f unction a re required to p rovide t he J udicial Police Officers o r authorized a gents of t he
Agency, u pon t heir r equest, with t he a greements allowing t he d ecryption o f data t ransformed b y
means of the s ervices they have p rovided.
(2) T he J udicial P olice Officers and authorized a gents of the A gency may r equest t he
providers of the services referred t o i n p aragraph 1 a bove t o implement t hese agreements
themselves, unless t hey d emonstrate t hat they a re unable to meet s uch r equests.
Article 5 9.- ( 1) W hen justified b y the r equirements o f the i nvestigation o r the investigation, the h earing
or interrogation o f a person and/or t he c onfrontation between s everal persons m ay b e c arried out a t
several p oints in the n ational territory w hich are connected b y e lectronic m eans o f communication
guaranteeing t he confidentiality of t he t ransmission. A r eport of the o perations c arried out t here s hall
be d rawn u p i n each o f t hese places. These o perations m ay b e s ubject to audiovisual and/or sound
recording.
(2) W here c ircumstances so r equire, interpretation m ay b e p rovided d uring a h earing,
interrogation o r confrontation b y e lectronic m eans o f communication.
(3) T he p rovisions o f this article a re also a pplicable f or t he simultaneous execution, at
a p oint i n the n ational territory a nd a t a p oint located o utside, o f requests f or m utual a ssistance from
foreign j udicial authorities o r a cts of m utual assistance carried out a broad a t the r equest of the
Cameroonian j udicial a uthorities.
(4) T he t erms o f a pplication of this article a re defined by
regulatory r oute.
CHAPTER II
OFFENSES AND S ANCTIONS
Article 60.- ( 1) W hen a c ertification authority d oes n ot c omply with the o bligations to which it i s
subject, t he A gency m ay, a fter h aving f ormally notified the s tructure to submit its o bservations, order
a b an on t he c irculation o f the m eans o f c ryptography c oncerned.
(2) The b an o n placing on the market i s applicable t hroughout t he n ational t erritory. It
also imposes on the s upplier the o bligation t o withdraw:


21
- means o f c ryptography w hose c irculation h as b een prohibited
with c ommercial broadcasters;
- materials constituting m eans o f cryptography w hose c irculation h as b een prohibited and
which have been a cquired f or a f ee, directly o r through commercial distributors.
(3) The c ryptographic m eans c oncerned m ay be p ut b ack i nto circulation a s s oon
as t he previously unfulfilled obligations h ave b een met a nd duly n oted b y t he Agency.
Article 6 1.- (1) A gency personnel a nd experts o f legal e ntities responsible for a udits who r eveal,
without a uthorization, c onfidential information o f which t hey b ecame a ware d uring a s ecurity audit
shall be p unished b y i mprisonment o f t hree (03) months to three ( 03) years and a f ine o f 20,000
(twenty thousand) to 1 00,000 ( one h undred t housand) C FA f rancs.
(2) Is p unishable b y i mprisonment of three ( 03) months to four ( 04)
years, the refusal to c omply with s ummonses f rom a uthorized agents o f the Agency.
(3) Anyone w ho, b y a ny means w hatsoever, o bstructs, incites r esistance o r prevents
the conduct o f the security a udits p rovided f or i n this a rticle o r refuses to provide the information o r
documents relating t hereto s hall b e p unished with imprisonment o f one (01) to five ( 05) years a nd a
fine of 1 00,000 ( one h undred t housand) to 1,000,000 (one million) C FA francs o r one of these t wo
penalties o nly.
Article 6 2.- ( 1) Anyone who presents t o the persons m entioned i n Articles 3 3 a nd 3 4 a bove, content o r an
activity as b eing illicit with the aim of o btaining i ts withdrawal or s topping i ts dissemination, while knowing t his
information t o be inaccurate, s hall be p unished w ith i mprisonment o f o ne ( 01) t o f ive (05) y ears and a f ine o f
200,000 ( two h undred thousand) to 2 ,000,000 (two m illion) C FA francs.
(2) T he p ublication d irector i s required to insert, u nder p enalty o f a f ine o f 100,000
(one hundred t housand) to 2 ,000,000 ( two million) CFA francs, w ithin forty-eight (48) hours of their
receipt, t he responses o f a ny p erson designated in the e lectronic communications service.
Article 6 3.- (1) T he l egal or de f acto manager o f a l egal entity c arrying out t he a ctivity defined i n
Articles 3 3 a nd 34 o f t his l aw, w ho has n ot k ept t he information referred t o in Articles 2 5 a nd 29
above, s hall be punished with imprisonment o f one (01) to five ( 05) years and a f ine o f 40,000 ( forty
thousand) t o 4 ,000,000 (four m illion) CFA francs.
(2) The d e j ure o r de f acto manager of a l egal person c arrying out t he a ctivity defined
in Articles 37 a nd 38 w ho does not c omply with the r equirements s et out i n said A rticles s hall be
liable t o t he same p enalties.


22
Article 6 4.- (1) L egal p ersons are c riminally l iable f or o ffences c ommitted o n their behalf
by t heir g overning bodies.
(2) T he criminal l iability of legal persons does n ot e xclude
that o f natural persons w ho are perpetrators o r accomplices o f t he s ame a cts.
(3) T he penalties i ncurred b y l egal persons are fines of 5,000,000 ( five
million) t o 50,000,000 ( fifty m illion) C FA francs.
(4) N otwithstanding the penalty provided for i n paragraph 3 a bove, one o f
the following a dditional penalties m ay a lso b e imposed o n legal persons:
- d issolution w hen it concerns a c rime o r an offense p unishable w ith regard t o
natural persons by a p rison sentence g reater t han or e qual to t hree (03)
years and w hen t he legal person has been diverted from i ts o bject t o serve
as a s upport f or t he commission o f t he incriminated a cts;
- t he prohibition, p ermanently o r f or a p eriod o f at l east five y ears, f rom e xercising
directly or indirectly o ne o r m ore professional o r s ocial activities;
- t he temporary c losure f or a p eriod o f at l east five ( 05) years, under the
conditions p rovided for b y article 3 4 of t he Penal Code, o f the establishments
or o ne o r m ore of the establishments of t he company u sed t o c ommit the
incriminated a cts;
- e xclusion from p ublic m arkets permanently or f or a p eriod o f a t least five (05)
years;
- t he ban, permanently o r f or a p eriod o f five ( 05) years
less, to make a public appeal f or s avings;
- t he prohibition, f or a p eriod o f at l east five ( 05) years, o f i ssuing checks o ther
than those w hich allow the withdrawal of f unds b y t he drawer from t he
drawee o r t hose which a re c ertified o r o f using payment cards; - the
confiscation o f the
thing which w as used o r w as intended to c ommit the offense o r o f t he t hing
which i s t he product thereof; - the p ublication or d issemination o f
the decision pronounced e ither b y t he w ritten p ress or b y a ny means o f
communication to t he public by e lectronic m eans.
Article 6 5.- (1) A nyone who, without r ight o r a uthorization, i ntercepts by t echnical m eans
data during t ransmission o r n ot, to, f rom or w ithin an electronic c ommunications network,
an information s ystem or terminal e quipment, s hall b e punished w ith imprisonment of f ive
(05) t o ten (10) y ears a nd a f ine o f 5 ,000,000 (five m illion) t o 1 0,000,000 ( ten million) CFA
francs or one of these two p enalties only.


23
(2) A ny unauthorized access to all or part o f an e lectronic c ommunications network o r a n
information s ystem or terminal e quipment shall be p unishable by t he penalties p rovided for i n paragraph 1
above.
(3) T he penalties provided for i n paragraph 1 a bove a re doubled in the event of unlawful
access affecting t he i ntegrity, c onfidentiality or availability of the electronic c ommunications network or t he
information s ystem.
(4) Any person w ho, without authority, a llows access to an e lectronic c ommunications
network o r t o an information s ystem by i ntellectual c hallenge shall be p unished w ith t he same p enalties
provided f or i n p aragraph 1 above.
Article 66.- ( 1) A nyone w ho c auses the d isruption o r interruption of the o peration of an e lectronic
communications network or t erminal equipment b y i ntroducing, transmitting, d amaging, e rasing,
deteriorating, modifying, deleting o r making d ata inaccessible s hall be p unished w ith i mprisonment of two
(02) to f ive (05) y ears and a f ine o f 1,000,000 (one million) t o 2,000,000 ( two m illion) CFA f rancs or o ne of
these two penalties only.
(2) Persons w ho use m isleading o r undesirable s oftware t o carry out operations o n a user's
terminal e quipment without f irst i nforming the user of the exact n ature o f the operations t hat the said
software i s l ikely to damage shall b e liable to the same p enalties p rovided for i n paragraph 1 a bove.
(3) A nyone w ho, using potentially unwanted software, collects, a ttempts to collect o r
facilitates one of t hese o perations t o access information f rom the o perator or provider o f a n etwork or
electronic s ervice i n o rder t o commit o ffenses s hall be p unished w ith t he same p enalties p rovided for i n
paragraph 1 above.
Article 67.- C onstitutes an attack o n the i ntegrity of a n e lectronic c ommunications network o r an i nformation
system and is p unishable b y t he penalties p rovided for i n Article 66, paragraph 1 a bove, t he act of causing
a serious d isruption o r interruption o f the operation o f an e lectronic c ommunications network o f terminal
equipment b y t he i ntroduction, transmission, m odification, deletion o r alteration o f data.
Article 68.- ( 1) A nyone w ho f raudulently accesses or maintains a ccess to all or part o f a n e lectronic
communications network or a n information system b y t ransmitting, d amaging, c ausing s erious disruption
or i nterruption o f t he operation o f said system or n etwork shall be p unished w ith i mprisonment of five ( 05)
to t en (10) years and a f ine o f 10,000,000 ( ten m illion) to 50,000,000 ( fifty m illion) CFA f rancs or one o f
these two penalties only.
(2) T he penalties provided for i n paragraph 1 above a re d oubled if t his results i n either the
deletion or modification o f data contained i n the i nformation s ystem, or an a lteration o f its o peration.


24
Article 6 9.- Anyone w ho a ccesses w ithout right, a nd i n violation o f security measures, a ll o r part o f
an e lectronic communications network, an i nformation system o r terminal e quipment, i n order t o
obtain i nformation o r d ata, i n r elation to a n i nformation s ystem connected t o another i nformation
system, s hall b e p unished by imprisonment o f five ( 05) t o ten ( 10) y ears a nd a fine o f 10,000,000
(ten million) t o 100,000,000 ( one h undred m illion) CFA francs o r one o f these t wo p enalties o nly.
Article 7 0.- Anyone w ho c auses, b y saturation, a n a ttack on a n e lectronic communications n etwork
resource o r a n information s ystem with t he a im of bringing i t down b y p reventing t he e xpected
services f rom b eing provided s hall be punished w ith a fine o f 1,000,000 ( one million) t o 5,000,000
(five million) C FA f rancs.
Article 7 1.- Anyone w ho e nters d ata i nto a n i nformation system or a n e lectronic communications
network w ithout authority with a v iew to d eleting o r modifying the d ata contained t herein s hall be
punished w ith imprisonment o f t wo (02) t o five ( 05) y ears a nd a fine o f 1,000,000 ( one million) to
25,000,000 ( twenty-five million) CFA f rancs.
Article 7 2.- Anyone w ho, i n a ny way w hatsoever, w ithout authority, introduces, a lters, e rases o r
deletes electronic d ata i n s uch a w ay as t o c ause financial l oss t o another person i n order t o obtain
economic b enefit shall b e punished b y the penalties p rovided for in Article 66 a bove.
Article 7 3.- (1) I s p unishable b y imprisonment o f two ( 02) t o ten ( 10) y ears a nd a fine o f 25,000,000
(twenty five m illion) t o 5 0,000,000 ( fifty m illion)
F CFA, or o ne o f t hese t wo penalties only, anyone who, by m eans o f an i nformation s ystem or in a
counterfeit c ommunications network, falsifies a payment, credit o r withdrawal c ard or knowingly u ses
or a ttempts t o u se a c ounterfeit or falsified payment, credit o r w ithdrawal c ard.
(2) Anyone w ho k nowingly a grees t o receive payment by e lectronic means u sing a
counterfeit o r f alsified p ayment, credit or withdrawal card shall be p unished b y t he p enalties p rovided
for in p aragraph 1 a bove.
Article 7 4.- (1) W hoever, b y any means w hatsoever, i nvades the p rivacy o f another p erson's p rivate
life b y fixing, r ecording o r transmitting, w ithout the c onsent o f the a uthor, e lectronic data o f a private
or c onfidential n ature shall be p unished with i mprisonment o f one ( 01) t o two ( 02) y ears a nd a fine
of 1 ,000,000 ( one million) to 5 ,000,000 ( five m illion) CFA francs.
(2) Persons who, without a uthority, i ntercept personal data d uring t heir transmission
from o ne i nformation system t o a nother s hall be l iable t o the p enalties p rovided for in paragraph 1
above;


25
(3) A nyone who p rocesses o r c auses to be processed, even through n egligence,
personal d ata i n violation o f t he f ormalities prior to their implementation shall b e punished w ith
imprisonment o f o ne ( 01) to t hree ( 03) years a nd a fine of 1,000,000 (one million) to 5,000,000 ( five
million) CFA francs or one o f t hese t wo penalties o nly.
(4) T he act of c ollecting by i llicit means, p ersonal data o f a person with a view t o
infringing t heir p rivacy and r eputation, s hall b e punished b y imprisonment o f six ( 06) months to t wo
(02) y ears a nd a fine o f 1 ,000,000 ( one million) to 5,000,000 ( five m illion) CFA f rancs or o ne of t hese
two penalties only.
(5) T he penalties p rovided f or i n p aragraph 4 above are doubled a gainst anyone who
puts, c auses t o b e p ut o nline, k eeps o r causes t o be kept in c omputer memory, w ithout the express
consent o f t he person c oncerned, p ersonal data w hich, d irectly o r indirectly, r eveal t heir tribal origins,
their political or religious o pinions, t heir trade u nion membership o r
his m orals.
(6) T he penalties p rovided f or i n p aragraph 5 above apply to persons who m isuse
information, i n particular, w hen r ecording, c lassifying o r transmitting i t.
(7) A nyone who k eeps i nformation in a nominative or encrypted form b eyond t he l egal
duration i ndicated i n the r equest f or a dvice o r t he declaration prior to the implementation of automated
processing shall b e p unished with i mprisonment o f six ( 06) months to two (02) years a nd a fine of
5,000,000 ( five m illion) t o 5 0,000,000 ( fifty m illion) CFA francs, o r one of these two penalties only.
(8) T he p enalties provided f or i n p aragraph 7 above s hall be imposed f or the d isclosure
personal data t hat u ndermines t he v ictim's reputation.
Article 75.- ( 1) Anyone who records a nd distributes f or profit, by means o f electronic c ommunications
or an information s ystem w ithout the c onsent o f the person concerned, i mages t hat infringe on b odily
integrity s hall b e p unished with i mprisonment of two (02) t o five (05) y ears and a f ine of 1,000,000
(one m illion) t o 5 ,000,000 ( five m illion) C FA francs o r one of these two penalties only.
(2) T his a rticle d oes n ot a pply w hen the recording a nd broadcasting r esult f rom t he
normal exercise o f a profession w hose purpose is to inform t he public o r are c arried o ut in o rder to
serve a s e vidence i n court i n accordance w ith t he provisions o f the Code o f Criminal Procedure.
Article 76.- A nyone w ho creates, transports or d istributes, by means o f electronic communications
or an information s ystem, a message of a c hild p ornographic n ature, o r o f a nature l ikely t o seriously
harm the d ignity o f a child, s hall be p unished b y imprisonment o f five (05) to ten (10) y ears a nd a
fine o f 5,000,000 ( five m illion) t o 1 0,000,000 ( ten million) CFA f rancs or one of these two penalties
only.


26
Article 7 7.- ( 1) A nyone who, b y m eans o f electronic c ommunications o r a n information system, commits
an i nsult a gainst a r ace o r a r eligion s hall b e p unished with i mprisonment o f two (02) t o five (05) y ears
and a fine o f 2 ,000,000 ( two m illion) t o 5,000,000 ( five million) CFA f rancs or one of t hese t wo penalties
only.
(2) T he p enalties provided f or i n paragraph 1 above a re d oubled when t he o ffence i s
committed with the aim of arousing h atred o r c ontempt among c itizens.
Article 7 8.- ( 1) A nyone who publishes o r disseminates news b y m eans o f electronic c ommunications o r
an i nformation s ystem without b eing able to p rovide p roof o f its v eracity or to j ustify that he had good
reason to believe i n the truth o f said news shall b e p unished with i mprisonment o f six (06) m onths t o t wo
(02) years a nd a fine o f 5,000,000 ( five million) t o 10,000,000 ( ten million) CFA f rancs or o ne of these two
penalties o nly.
(2) T he p enalties provided f or in p aragraph 1 above a re d oubled w hen
the o ffense is c ommitted w ith the a im of disturbing t he p ublic peace.
Article 7 9.- T he p enalties for private o utrage a gainst p ublic decency provided f or i n A rticle 295 of t he
Penal C ode a re imprisonment of f ive ( 05) t o t en ( 10) y ears and a fine of 5 ,000,000 (five million) t o
10,000,000 ( ten million) C FA francs or o ne of these t wo penalties only, w hen t he v ictim h as been put i n
contact w ith the perpetrator o f the s aid acts, through t he u se of electronic c ommunications o r information
systems.
Article 8 0.- ( 1) A nyone who distributes, f ixes, records o r t ransmits, f or a fee o r free of c harge, an i mage
showing a cts o f pedophilia o n a m inor b y m eans of electronic c ommunications o r a n information system
shall be p unished w ith imprisonment of t hree (03) t o six (06) y ears and a fine of 5,000,000 ( five million) t o
10,000,000 ( ten m illion) C FA f rancs or one of these t wo penalties only.
(2) A nyone who o ffers, m akes available or distributes, imports o r exports, b y a ny
electronic means w hatsoever, a n image o r representation o f a paedophile n ature shall b e p unished w ith
the s ame p enalties p rovided f or i n paragraph 1 above.
(3) A nyone who p ossesses in a n electronic c ommunications n etwork o r in a n i nformation
system, a n i mage o r r epresentation of a p edophile n ature, shall b e punished by i mprisonment o f one (01)
to five (05) years a nd a f ine o f 5,000,000 ( five m illion) t o 10,000,000 ( ten million) CFA f rancs or o ne of
these t wo penalties only.
(4) T he p enalties provided f or i n paragraph 3 above a re d oubled when a n e lectronic
communications network has b een used t o disseminate t he i mage or r epresentation o f the m inor to the
public.


27
(5) The provisions o f t his a rticle also a pply to pornographic images
depicting m inors.
Article 8 1.- ( 1) T he f ollowing a cts s hall be punishable b y the p enalties p rovided for i n
Article 82 below, w hen c ommitted using an electronic communications network o r an
information s ystem:
- t he offering, production, making a vailable o f child pornography f or t he purpose
of its distribution;
- p rocuring o r procuring c hild pornography f or o thers through an information
system;
- t he fact that adults m ake sexual p ropositions t o minors u nder fifteen ( 15)
years o f a ge o r a person p resenting t hemselves as such;
- t he dissemination o r transmission of child pornography t hrough an information
system.
(2) Any act t hat is c onsidered child p ornography
visually presenting:
- a minor e ngaging i n s exually e xplicit conduct;
- a person w ho a ppears to b e a m inor engaging i n a
sexually e xplicit behavior;
- r ealistic images s howing a m inor engaging in a
sexually e xplicit behavior.
Article 82.- A nyone w ho c ommits or attempts to commit b y m eans o f electronic
communications an outrage a gainst t he public decency of a minor under t he age of
fifteen ( 15) shall be punished w ith double t he penalties provided for in A rticle 7 9 o f this l aw.
years.
Article 8 3.- ( 1) A nyone w ho m akes s exual p ropositions t o a p erson of t he same s ex b y
means o f electronic c ommunications shall b e punished w ith i mprisonment o f one ( 01) t o
two ( 02) y ears and a f ine o f 500,000 ( five hundred t housand) t o 1,000,000 ( one million)
CFA f rancs or one of these t wo penalties o nly.
(2) The p enalties p rovided f or in p aragraph 1 above are d oubled when
The proposals were followed b y sexual i ntercourse.
Article 8 4.- ( 1) A nyone w ho a ccesses, f raudulently becomes aware o f, delays a ccess t o
or deletes electronic c ommunications addressed t o others shall be punished b y
imprisonment o f six months (06) t o t wo (02) y ears a nd a f ine o f 5 00,000 t o 1,000,000
CFA f rancs or o ne o f these t wo p enalties only.
(2) Any person w ho i ntercepts w ithout authorization, d iverts, u ses or
discloses e lectronic c ommunications sent o r r eceived by electronic means or installs
devices d esigned t o carry o ut such i nterceptions s hall be punished w ith t he s ame
penalties p rovided f or i n paragraph 1 above.


28
Article 85.- A nyone w ho, while carrying o ut a public service m ission, a cting in t he e xercise o r on t he o ccasion
of t he exercise o f his f unctions, diverts or f acilitates the d iversion, d eletion o r access t o electronic
communications or the revelation o f t he content o f these communications s hall be p unished b y t he p enalties
provided f or i n Article 84 a bove.
Article 86.- ( 1) A nyone w ho imports, h olds, o ffers, transfers, sells or makes available, in a ny f orm whatsoever,
a computer p rogram, a p assword, a n access c ode or any s imilar computer data d esigned a nd/or specially
adapted t o a llow access to a ll or part o f a n e lectronic communications n etwork o r an information s ystem
shall be p unished b y the penalties p rovided f or i n A rticle 7 1 a bove.
(2) A nyone who c auses a s erious disruption o r interruption o f an electronic c ommunications
network o r a n i nformation system w ith the intention o f undermining t he i ntegrity of the d ata s hall also b e
punished with the same p enalties p rovided f or in p aragraph 1 above.
Article 87.- T he p erpetrators o f o ne of t he offences provided f or in A rticle 8 6 a bove also i ncur the f ollowing
additional p enalties:
- c onfiscation i n accordance w ith the t erms p rovided f or i n A rticle 3 5 of the C ode
Criminal, of a ny o bject u sed o r intended t o commit the o ffense or c onsidered to be t he
product thereof, w ith the exception o f objects capable o f restitution;
- t he prohibition u nder t he conditions p rovided f or by a rticle 36 of the C ode
Criminal, for a p eriod o f a t l east f ive ( 05) years, o f exercising a public function o r a socio-
professional a ctivity, w hen the a cts w ere committed i n t he e xercise o r on the o ccasion o f the
exercise o f functions;
- c losure, u nder t he conditions p rovided f or i n a rticle 3 4 o f the C ode
Penalty for a p eriod o f a t l east five ( 05) years, o f the e stablishments o r one o r more of the
establishments of t he company u sed to commit the i ncriminated acts;
- e xclusion, f or a p eriod o f a t l east f ive ( 05) years, f rom markets
public.
Article 88.- 1 ) Anyone w ho, having k nowledge o f the s ecret d ecryption a greement, o f a means of cryptography
likely to h ave b een u sed t o prepare, f acilitate o r commit a crime o r an offense, refuses to hand o ver t he said
agreement t o t he judicial authorities or to i mplement it, u pon the r equisition of these a uthorities, s hall be
punished w ith imprisonment of ( 01) to f ive ( 05) years a nd a fine o f 100,000 ( one hundred thousand) t o
1,000,000 ( one million) C FA f rancs or one of these two p enalties only.


29
(2) If t he r efusal i s made w hen the d elivery or i mplementation of the agreement w ould
have m ade i t p ossible to a void the c ommission of a c rime o r an o ffense o r t o limit i ts e ffects, t he
penalties p rovided f or in p aragraph 1 above are increased from t hree (03) to five ( 05) years of
imprisonment a nd t he fine from 1 ,000,000 (one million) t o 5,000,000 ( five million) C FA f rancs.
Article 8 9.- Suspension o f s entence m ay not b e g ranted for t he o ffences p rovided for i n this law.
TITLE IV
INTERNATIONAL C OOPERATION AND J UDICIAL A SSISTANCE
CHAPTER I
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
Article 9 0.- (1) I n t he exercise of t heir a ctivities, Cameroonian c ertification authorities m ay, u nder the
control of t he Agency, e stablish agreements with foreign c ertification a uthorities.
(2) T he p rocedures f or establishing t he a greements p rovided f or i n paragraph 1
above are d etermined by regulation.
CHAPTER II
INTERNATIONAL MUTUAL LEGAL A SSISTANCE
Article 9 1.- (1) U nless an i nternational c onvention to which Cameroon i s a p arty p rovides otherwise,
requests f or mutual assistance f rom C ameroonian judicial authorities t o foreign j udicial authorities
shall be t ransmitted t hrough t he M inistry o f F oreign Affairs. The e xecution d ocuments s hall be
returned to t he authorities o f t he r equesting S tate by t he same means.
(2) R equests for m utual assistance from foreign j udicial authorities t o C ameroonian judicial
authorities must b e submitted t hrough d iplomatic channels b y the foreign G overnment c oncerned. The
execution d ocuments are returned t o t he authorities o f t he requesting State t hrough t he same c hannels.
(3) In c ases of e mergency, r equests for m utual a ssistance r equested b y C ameroonian
or foreign authorities m ay be t ransmitted directly t o the a uthorities o f the requested S tate for
execution. T he e xecution d ocuments are r eturned t o the c ompetent authorities o f the r equesting
State i n accordance w ith t he s ame p rocedures.
(4) Subject to i nternational conventions, r equests for m utual assistance f rom foreign
judicial a uthorities t o C ameroonian j udicial a uthorities m ust b e n otified b y t he foreign g overnment
concerned. T his notice s hall be t ransmitted to the c ompetent j udicial authorities t hrough diplomatic
channels.


30
(5) I n c ases o f emergency, requests f or m utual a ssistance from f oreign j udicial
authorities s hall b e forwarded t o t he Public P rosecutor or the t erritorially c ompetent I nvestigating
Judge.
(6) I f t he P ublic Prosecutor r eceives d irectly from a f oreign a uthority a r equest for
mutual assistance which c an o nly b e executed b y t he E xamining Magistrate, h e s hall t ransmit i t to
the l atter f or e xecution o r refer t he m atter to the A ttorney G eneral i n the c ase p rovided f or i n Article
94 o f this l aw.
(7) B efore p roceeding w ith t he e xecution o f a r equest for m utual a ssistance which h as
been directly referred to h im, the E xamining Magistrate s hall i mmediately c ommunicate i t t o the
Public Prosecutor f or a dvice.
Article 9 2.- ( 1) R equests f or m utual a ssistance from f oreign judicial authorities s hall be e xecuted b y
the P ublic Prosecutor o r b y the o fficers or agents o f the J udicial Police r equested f or t his purpose by
this m agistrate.
(2) T hey a re carried o ut by t he E xamining Magistrate o r by J udicial Police o fficers
acting on a letter o f r equest f rom this magistrate w hen they r equire c ertain p rocedural acts w hich can
only be o rdered o r c arried o ut d uring a p reliminary investigation.
Article 9 3.- ( 1) R equests f or m utual a ssistance from f oreign judicial authorities s hall be e xecuted i n
accordance w ith the p rocedural rules p rovided f or i n the C ode of Criminal P rocedure.
(2) H owever, i f t he r equest f or m utual a ssistance so s pecifies, it s hall be e xecuted in
accordance w ith the p rocedural r ules e xpressly indicated by t he c ompetent a uthorities o f the
requesting S tate, w ithout t hese rules r educing t he r ights of the p arties o r the p rocedural guarantees
provided f or by t he C ode of C riminal P rocedure.
(3) W here t he r equest f or mutual a ssistance cannot be e xecuted in accordance w ith
the r equirements o f t he r equesting S tate, t he c ompetent C ameroonian a uthorities s hall inform t he
authorities o f the requesting State w ithout delay and indicate u nder what c onditions t he r equest
could b e e xecuted.
(4) T he c ompetent C ameroonian authorities a nd those of the r equesting S tate may
subsequently a gree on the a ction to b e taken on t he r equest, w here a ppropriate, m aking it s ubject
to compliance w ith t he said conditions.
(5) T he i rregularity o f t he t ransmission of the request f or m utual a ssistance c annot c onstitute a
cause f or nullity of t he acts c arried o ut i n execution of this r equest.
Article 9 4.- ( 1) I f the e xecution o f a r equest f or m utual a ssistance from a f oreign judicial a uthority is
likely t o undermine p ublic order or t he e ssential i nterests of the N ation, the P ublic Prosecutor, h aving
been n otified o f this r equest, s hall transmit i t to the A ttorney G eneral, w ho s hall refer i t t o the M inister
responsible f or J ustice and, where appropriate, s hall n otify the P ublic Prosecutor of this transmission.


31
(2) I f t he Minister r esponsible f or J ustice is notified, h e s hall i nform the r equesting a uthority,
where a ppropriate, that h is r equest c annot b e g ranted, in whole or i n part. This information s hall b e n otified
to t he j udicial authority concerned a nd s hall p revent t he e xecution o f the r equest f or mutual a ssistance o r
the return of t he enforcement d ocuments.
TITLE V
TRANSITIONAL A ND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 95.- Implementing t exts establish, a s n ecessary, the m ethods of application o f this l aw.
Article 96.- Authorisations and d eclarations f or t he s upply, import and e xport o f means o f cryptography
issued b y t he c ompetent a uthorities r emain v alid until t he e xpiry o f the p eriod p rovided for by t hem.
Article 97.- This l aw shall b e registered a nd p ublished f ollowing t he e mergency p rocedure, t hen inserted in
the O fficial J ournal in F rench a nd E nglish./-
YAOUNDE, THE
THE P RESIDENT OF THE R EPUBLIC,
PAUL B IYA

